thank you, thank you, thank you. please, if you have a seat, be seated. (laughter.) if you don’t, come up on stage. thank you very much. it’s a great honor to be here. mr. president, they tell me you’re over there somewhere. there you are. thank you, mr. president. “be not afraid.” they were the first words at the first public address of the first polish pope after his election on october of 1978. they were words that would come to define pope john paul ii. words that would change the world. john paul brought the message here to warsaw in his first trip back home as pope in june of 1979. it was a message about the power—the power of faith, the power of resilience, and the power of the people. in the face of a cruel and brutal system of government, it was a message that helped end the soviet repression in the central land and eastern europe 30 years ago. it was a message that will overcome the cruelty and brutality of this unjust war. when pope john paul brought that message in 1979, the soviet union ruled with an iron fist behind an iron curtain. then a year later, the solidarity movement took hold in poland. and while i know he couldn’t be here tonight, we’re all grateful in america and around the world for lech wałęsa. (applause.) it reminds me of that phrase of philosopher kierkegaard: “[f]aith sees best in the dark.” and there were dark moments. ten years later, the soviet union collapsed, and poland and central and eastern europe would soon be free. nothing about that battle for freedom was simple or easy. it was a long, painful slog fought over not days and months, but years and decades. but we emerged anew in the great battle for freedom: a battle between democracy and autocracy, between liberty and repression, between a rules-based order and one governed by brute force. in this battle, we need to be clear-eyed. this battle will not be won in days or months either. we need to steel ourselves for the long fight ahead. mr. president, mr. prime minister, mr. mayor, members of the parliament, distinguished guests, and the people of poland, and i suspect some people of ukraine that are here: we’re—(applause)—we are gathered here at the royal castle in this city that holds a sacred place in the history of not only of europe, but humankind’s unending search for freedom. for generations, warsaw has stood where liberty has been challenged and liberty has prevailed. in fact, it was here in warsaw when a young refugee, who fled her home country from czechoslovakia was under soviet domination, came back to speak and stand in solidarity with dissidents. her name was madeleine korbel albright. she became—(applause)—one of the most ardent supporters of democracy in the world. she was a friend with whom i served. america’s first woman secretary of state. she passed away three days ago. she fought her whole life for essential democratic principles. and now, in the perennial struggle for democracy and freedom, ukraine and its people are on the frontlines fighting to save their nation. and their brave resistance is part of a larger fight for an essential democratic principles that unite all free people: the rule of law; free and fair elections; the freedom to speak, to write, and to assemble; the freedom to worship as one chooses; freedom of the press. these principles are essential in a free society. (applause.) but they have always—they have always been under siege. they’ve always been embattled. every generation has had to defeat democracy’s mortal foes. that’s the way of the world—for the world is imperfect, as we know. where the appetites and ambitions of a few forever seek to dominate the lives and liberties of many. my message to the people of ukraine is the message i delivered today to ukraine’s foreign minister and defense minister, who i believe are here tonight: we stand with you. period. today’s fighting in kyiv and mariupol and kharkiv are the latest battle in a long struggle: hungary, 1956; poland, 1956 then again 1981; czechoslovakia, 1968. soviet tanks crushed democratic uprisings, but the resistance continued until finally, in 1989, the berlin wall and all of the walls of soviet domination—they fell. they fell. and the people prevailed. but the battle for democracy could not conclude and did not conclude with the end of the cold war. over the last 30 years, the forces of autocracy have revived all across the globe. its hallmarks are familiar ones: contempt for the rule of law, contempt for democratic freedom, contempt for the truth itself. today, russia has strangled democracy—has sought to do so elsewhere, not only in its homeland. under false claims of ethnic solidarity, it has invalidated [invaded] neighboring nations. putin has the gall to say he’s “de-nazifying” ukraine. it’s a lie. it’s just cynical. he knows that. and it’s also obscene. president zelenskyy was democratically elected. he’s jewish. his father’s family was wiped out in the nazi holocaust. and putin has the audacity, like all autocrats before him, to believe that might will make right. in my own country, a former president named abraham lincoln voiced the opposing spirit to save our union in the midst of a civil war. he said, “let us have faith that right makes might.” “right makes might.” today, let us now have that faith again. let us resolve to put the strength of democracies into action to thwart the denigns [sic] of our—the designs of autocracy. let us remember that the test of this moment is the test of all time. the kremlin wants to portray nato enlargement as an imperial project aimed at destabilizing russia. nothing is further from the truth. nato is a defensive alliance. it has never sought the demise of russia. in the lead-up to the current crisis, the united states and nato worked for months to engage russia to avert a war. i met with him in person and talked to him many times on the phone. time and again, we offered real diplomacy and concrete proposals to strengthen european security, enhance transparency, and build confidence on all sides. but putin and russia met each of the proposals with disinterest in any negotiation, with lies and ultimatums. russia was bent on violence from the start. i know not all of you believed me and us when we kept saying, “they are going to cross the border. they are going to attack.” repeatedly, he asserted, “we have no interest in war.” guaranteed he would not move. repeatedly saying he would not invade ukraine. repeatedly saying russian troops along the border were there for “training”—all 180,000 of them. there is simply no justification or provocation for russia’s choice of war. it’s an example of one of the oldest of human impulses: using brute force and disinformation to satisfy a craving for absolute power and control. it’s nothing less than a direct challenge to the rule-based international order established since the end of world war two. and it threatens to return to decades of war that ravaged europe before the international rule-based order was put in place. we cannot go back to that. we cannot. the gravity of the threat is why the response of the west has been so swift and so powerful and so unified, unprecedented, and overwhelming. swift and punishing costs are the only things that are going to get russia to change its course. within days of its invasion, the west had moved jointly with sanctions to damage russia’s economy. russia’s central bank is now blocked from the global financial systems, denying kremlin’s access to the war fund it stashed around the globe. we’ve aimed at the heart of russia’s economy by stopping the imports of russian energy to the united states. to date, the united states has sanctioned 140 russian oligarchs and their family members, seizing their ill-begotten gains: their yachts, their luxury apartments, their mansions. we’ve sanctioned more than 400 russian government officials, including key architects of this war. these officials and oligarchs have reaped enormous benefit from the corruption connected to the kremlin, and now they have to share in the pain. the private sector is acting as well. over 400 private multinational companies have pulled out of doing business in russia—left russia completely—from oil companies to mcdonald’s. as a result of these unprecedented sanctions, the ruble almost is immediately reduced to rubble. the russian economy—(applause)—that’s true, by the way. it takes about 200 rubles to equal one dollar. the economy is on track to be cut in half in the coming years. it was ranked—russia’s economy was ranked the 11th biggest economy in the world before this evasion [sic]—invasion. it will soon not even rank among the top 20 in the world. taken together, these economic sanctions are a new kind of economic statecraft with the power to inflict damage that rivals military might. these international sanctions are sapping russian strength, its ability to replenish its military, and its ability—its ability to project power. and it is putin—it is vladimir putin who is to blame, period. at the same time, alongside these economic sanctions, the western world has come together to provide for the people of ukraine with incredible levels of military, economic, and humanitarian assistance. in the years before the invasion, we, america, had sent over $650 million, before they crossed the border, in weapons to ukraine, including anti-air and anti-armor equipment. since the invasion, america has committed another $1.35 billion in weapons and ammunition. and thanks to the courage and bravery of the ukrainian people—(applause)—the equipment we’ve sent and our colleagues have sent have been used to devastating effect to defend ukrainian land and airspace. our allies and partners have stepped up as well. but as i’ve made clear: american forces are in europe—not in europe to engage in conflict with russian forces. american forces are here to defend nato allies. yesterday, i met with the troops that are serving alongside our polish allies to bolster nato’s frontline defenses. the reason we wanted to make clear is their movement on ukraine: don’t even think about moving on one single inch of nato territory. we have a sacred obligation—(applause)—we have a sacred obligation under article 5 to defend each and every inch of nato territory with the full force of our collective power. and earlier today, i visited your national stadium, where thousands of ukrainian refugees are now trying to answer the toughest questions a human can ask: “my god, what’s going to happen to me? what’s going to happen to my family?” i saw tears in many of the mothers’ eyes as i embraced them; their young children—their young children not sure whether to smile or cry. one little girl said, “mr. president”—she spoke a little english—“is my brother and my daddy—are they going to be okay? will i see them again?” without their husbands, their fathers, in many cases, their brothers or sisters who stayed back to fight for their country. i didn’t have to speak the language or understand the language to feel the emotion in their eyes, the way they gripped my hand, and little kids hung on to my leg, praying with a desperate hope that all this is temporary; apprehension that they may be perhaps forever away from their homes, almost with debilitating sadness that this is happening all over again. but i was also struck by the generosity of the people of warsaw—for that matter, all the polish people—for the depths of their compassion, their willingness to reach out—(applause)—opening their hearts. i was saying to the mayor they’re preparing to open their hearts and their homes simply to help. i also want to thank my friend, the great american chef, josé andrés, and his team who helped feeling [sic] those—(applause)—feeding those who are yearning to be free. but helping these refugees is not something poland or any other nation should carry alone. all the world democracies have a responsibility to help. all of them. and the people of ukraine can count on the united states to meet its responsibility. i’ve announced, two days ago, we will welcome 100,000 ukrainian refugees. we already have 8,000 a week coming to the united states of other nat-—nationalities. we’ll provide nearly $300 million of humanitarian assistance, providing tens of thousands of tons of food, water, medicine, and other basic supplies. in brussels, i announced the united states is prepared to provide more than $1 billion, in addition, in humanitarian aid. the world food programme told us that despite significant obstacles, at least some relief is getting to major cities in ukraine, but not metropol [sic]—no, excuse me, mar-—not mariupol, because russian forces are blocking relief supplies. but we’ll not cease our efforts to get humanitarian relief wherever it is needed in ukraine and for the people who’ve made it out of ukraine. notwithstanding the brutality of vladimir putin, let there be no doubt that this war has already been a strategic failure for russia already. having lost children myself—i know that’s no solace to the people who’ve lost family. but he, putin, thought ukrainians would roll over and not fight. not much of a student of history. instead, russian forces have met their match with brave and stiff ukrainian resistance. rather than breaking ukrainian resolve, russia’s brutal tactics have strengthened the resolve. rather than driving nato apart, the west is now stronger and more united than it has ever been. russia wanted less of a nato presence on its border, but now he has [we have] a stronger presence, a larger presence, with over a hundred thousand american troops here, along with all the other members of nato. in fact—(applause)—russia has managed to cause something i’m sure he never intended: the democracies of the world are revitalized with purpose and unity found in months that we’d once taken years to accomplish. it’s not only russia’s actions in ukraine that are reminding us of democracy’s blessing. it’s our own country—his own country, the kremlin, is jailing protestors. two hundred thousand people have allegedly already left. there’s a brain drain—leaving russia. shutting down independent news. state media is all propaganda, blocking the image of civilian targets, mass graves, starvation tactics of the russian forces in ukraine. is it any wonder, as i said, that 200,000 russians have all left their country in one month? a remarkable brain drain in such a short period of time, which brings me to my message to the russian people: i’ve worked with russian leaders for decades. i sat across the negotiating table going all the way back to soviet premier alexei kosygin to talk arms control at the height of the cold war. i’ve always spoken directly and honestly to you, the russian people. let me say this, if you’re able to listen: you, the russian people, are not our enemy. i refuse to believe that you welcome the killing of innocent children and grandparents or that you accept hospitals, schools, maternity wards that, for god’s sake, are being pummeled with russian missiles and bombs; or cities being surrounded so that civilians cannot flee; supplies cut off and attempting to starve ukrainians into submission. millions of families are being driven from their homes, including half of all ukraine’s children. these are not the actions of a great nation. of all people, you, the russian people, as well as all people across europe, still have the memory of being in a similar situation in the late thirties and forties—the situation of world war two—still fresh in the minds of many grandparents in the region. what—whatever your generation experienced—whether it experienced the siege of leningrad or heard about it from your parents and grandparents—train stations overflowing with terrified families fleeing their homes; nights sheltering in basements and cellars; mornings sitting through the rubble in your homes—these are not memories of the past. not anymore. because it’s exactly what the russian army is doing in ukraine right now. march 26, 2022. just days before—we’re at the twenty-fir-—you were a 21st century nation with hopes and dreams that people all over the world have for themselves and their family. now, vladimir putin’s aggression have cut you, the russian people, off from the rest of the world, and it’s taking russia back to the 19th century. this is not who you are. this is not the future reserve—you deserve for your families and your children. i’m telling you the truth: this war is not worthy of you, the russian people. putin can and must end this war. the american people stand with you and the brave citizens of ukraine who want peace. and my message to the rest of europe: this new battle for freedom has already made a few things crystal clear. first, europe must end its dependence on russian fossil fuels. and we, the united states, will help. that’s why just yesterday, in brussels, i announced a plan with the president of the european commission to get europe through the immediate energy crisis. over the long term, as a matter of economic security and national security and for the survivability of the planet, we all need to move as quickly as possible to clean, renewable energy. and we’ll work together to help get that done so that the days of any nation being subject to the whims of a tyrant for its energy needs are over. they must end. they must end. and second, we have to fight the corruption coming from the kremlin to give the russian people a fair chance. and finally, and most urgently, we maintain absolute unity—we must—among the world’s democracies. it’s not enough to speak with rhetorical flourish, of ennobling words of democracy, of freedom, equality, and liberty. all of us, including here in poland, must do the hard work of democracy each and every day. my country as well. that’s why—(applause)—that’s why i came to europe again this week with a clear and determined message for nato, for the g7, for the european union, for all freedom-loving nations: we must commit now to be in this fight for the long haul. we must remain unified today and tomorrow and the day after and for the years and decades to come. it will not be easy. there will be costs. but it’s a price we have to pay. because the darkness that drives autocracy is ultimately no match for the flame of liberty that lights the souls of free people everywhere. time and again, history shows that it’s from the darkest moments that the greatest progress follows. and history shows this is the task of our time, the task of this generation. let’s remember: the hammer blow that brought down the berlin wall, the might that lifted the iron curtain were not the words of a single leader; it was the people of europe who, for decades, fought to free themselves. their sheer bravery opened the border between austria and hungary for the pan-european picnic. they joined hands for the baltic way. they stood for solidarity here in poland. and together, it was an unmistakable and undeniable force of the people that the soviet union could not withstand. and we’re seeing it once again today with the brave ukrainian people, showing that their power of many is greater than the will of any one dictator. so, in this hour, let the words of pope john paul burn as brightly today: “never, ever give up hope, never doubt, never tire, never become discouraged. be not afraid.” a dictator bent on rebuilding an empire will never erase a people’s love for liberty. brutality will never grind down their will to be free. ukraine will never be a victory for russia—for free people refuse to live in a world of hopelessness and darkness. we will have a different future—a brighter future rooted in democracy and principle, hope and light, of decency and dignity, of freedom and possibilities. for god’s sake, this man cannot remain in power. god bless you all. and may god defend our freedom. and may god protect our troops. thank you for your patience. thank you. thank you. thank you. well, thank you. please, if you have a seat, sit down. and i got to make one check here. (the president leaves the podium to greet audience members.) (the president returns to the podium.) i just had to make sure the two girls got ice cream when this is over. (laughter.) imagine how excited you’d be when you’re—four? five? almost five years old, coming to hear a president speak. (laughter.) my lord. in my faith, we call that purgatory. (laughter.) lauren, thank you for that gracious introduction. and in case you were wondering, i—in delaware—we’re a small state—we have the eighth-largest black population in america, and we have one of the most talented members of congress. and so if i didn’t walk around and pay my tribute to lisa blunt rochester my congresswoman—(applause)—immediately, that was — how are you, rev? good to see you. we’ve got a distinguished group of people here, and i want to thank lauren for sharing the powerful story and for helping the country understand what’s happening here. and to all of the descendants here today, and to the community and civil rights leaders, and members of the congressional black caucus that are here: thank you for making sure we all remember and we never forget. you know, there’s a verse in first corinthians that says, “for now, we see in a mirror dimly, but then, face to face, now i know in part, then i shall know fully.” it is—i just toured the hall of survivors here in greenwood cultural center, and i want to thank the incredible staff for hosting us here. and—(applause)—i mean that sincerely. thank you. and if i didn’t say what my father would insist on, please excuse my back. (laughter.) i apologize. but the tour—in the tour, i met mother randle, who’s only 56 [107] years old. (laughter.) god love her. and mother fletcher, who’s 67 [106] years old. (laughter.) and her brother—her brother, van ellis, who’s 100 years old. (laughter.) and he looks like he’s 60. thank you for spending so much time with me. i really mean it. it was a great honor. a genuine honor. you are the three known remaining survivors of a story seen in the mirror dimly. but no longer. now your story will be known in full view. the events we speak of today took place 100 years ago. and yet, i’m the first president in 100 years ever to come to tulsa—(applause)—i say that not as a compliment about me, but to think about it—a hundred years, and the first president to be here during that entire time, and in this place, in this ground, to acknowledge the truth of what took place here. for much too long, the history of what took place here was told in silence, cloaked in darkness. but just because history is silent, it doesn’t mean that it did not take place. and while darkness can hide much, it erases nothing. it erases nothing. some injustices are so heinous, so horrific, so grievous they can’t be buried, no matter how hard people try. and so it is here. only—only with truth can come healing and justice and repair. only with truth, facing it. but that isn’t enough. first, we have to see, hear, and give respect to mother randle, mother fletcher, and mr. van ellis. (applause.) to all those lost so many years ago, to all the descendants of those who suffered, to this community—that’s why we’re here: to shine a light, to make sure america knows the story in full. may 1921: formerly enslaved black people and their descendants are here in tulsa—a boom town of oil and opportunity in a new frontier. on the north side, across the rail tracks that divided the city already segregated by law, they built something of their own, worthy—worthy of their talent and their ambition: greenwood—a community, a way of life. black doctors and lawyers, pastors, teachers; running hospitals, law practices, libraries, churches, schools. black veterans, like a man i had the privilege to giving a command coin to, who fought—volunteered and fought, and came home and still faced such prejudice. (applause.) veterans had been back a few years helping after winning the first world war, building a new life back home with pride and confidence, who were a mom-and—they were, at the time—mom-and-plack [sic]—mom-and-pop black diners, grocery stores, barber shops, tailors—the things that make up a community. at the dreamland theatre, a young black couple, holding hands, falling in love. friends gathered at music clubs and pool halls; at the monroe family roller-skating rink. visitors staying in hotels, like the stradford. all around, black pride shared by the professional class and the working class who lived together, side by side, for blocks on end. mother randle was just six years old—six years old—living with her grandmom. she said she was lucky to have a home and toys, and fortunate to live without fear. mother fletcher was seven years old, the second of seven children. the youngest, being mr. van ellis, was just a few months old. the children of former sharecroppers, when they went to bed at night in greenwood, mother fletcher says they fell asleep rich in terms of the wealth—not real wealth, but a different wealth—a wealth in culture and community and heritage. (applause.) but one night—one night changed everything. everything changed. while greenwood was a community to itself, it was not separated from the outside. it wasn’t everyone, but there was enough hate, resentment, and vengeance in the community. enough people who believed that america does not belong to everyone and not everyone is created equal—native americans, asian americans, hispanic americans, black americans. a belief enforced by law, by badge, by hood and by noose. and it speaks to that—lit the fuse. it lit it by the spark that it provided—a fuse of fury—was an innocent interaction that turned into an in-—a terrible, terrible headline allegation of a black male teenager attacking a white female teenager. a white mob of 1,000 gathered around the courthouse where the black teenager was being held, ready to do what still occurred: lynch that young man that night. but 75 black men, including black veterans, arrived to stand guard. words were exchanged. then a scuffle. then shots fired. hell was unleashed. literal hell was unleashed. through the night and into the morning, the mob terrorized greenwood. torches and guns. shooting at will. a mob tied a black man by the waist to the back of their truck with his head banging along the pavement as they drove off. a murdered black family draped over the fence of their home outside. an elderly couple, knelt by their bed, praying to god with their heart and their soul, when they were shot in the back of their heads. private planes—private planes—dropping explosives—the first and only domestic aerial assault of its kind on an american city here in tulsa. eight of greenwood’s nearly two dozen churches burned, like mt. zion—across the street, at vernon ame. mother randle said it was like war. mother fletcher says, all these years later, she still sees black bodies around. the greenwood newspaper publisher a.j. smitherton [sic]—excuse me—smitherman penned a poem of what he heard and felt that night. and here’s the poem. he said, “kill them, burn them, set the pace… teach them how to keep their place. reign of murder, theft, and plunder was the order of the night.” that’s what he remembered in the poem that he wrote. one hundred years ago at this hour, on this first day of june, smoke darkened the tulsa sky, rising from 35 blocks of greenwood that were left in ash and ember, razed and in rubble. less than 24 hours—in less than 24 hours, 1,100 black homes and businesses were lost. insurance companies—they had insurance, many of them—rejected claims of damage. ten thousand people were left destitute and homeless, placed in internment camps. as i was told today, they were told, “don’t you mention you were ever in a camp or we’ll come and get you.” that’s what survivors told me. yet no one—no arrests of the mob were made. none. no proper accounting of the dead. the death toll records by local officials said there were 36 people. that’s all. thirty-six people. but based on studies, records, and accounts, the likelihood—the likely number is much more, in the multiple of hundreds. untold bodies dumped into mass graves. families who, at the time, waited for hours and days to know the fate of their loved ones are now descendants who have gone 100 years without closure. but, you know, as we speak, the process—the process of exhuming the unmarked graves has started. and at this moment, i’d like to pause for a moment of silence for the fathers, the mothers, the sisters, sons, and daughters, friends of god and greenwood. they deserve dignity, and they deserve our respect. may their souls rest in peace. [pause for a moment of silence.] my fellow americans, this was not a riot. this was a massacre—(applause)—among the worst in our history, but not the only one. and for too long, forgotten by our history. as soon as it happened, there was a clear effort to erase it from our memory—our collective memories—from the news and everyday conversations. for a long time, schools in tulsa didn’t even teach it, let alone schools elsewhere. and most people didn’t realize that, a century ago, a second ku klux klan had been founded—the second ku klux klan had been founded. a friend of mine, jon meacham—i had written—when i said i was running to restore the soul of america, he wrote a book called “the soul of america”—not because of what i said. and there’s a picture about page 160 in his book, showing over 30,000 ku klux klan members in full regalia, reverend—pointed hats, the robes—marching down pennsylvania avenue in washington, d.c. jesse, you know all about this. washin-—washington, d.c. if my memory is correct, there were 37 members of the house of representatives who were open members of the klan. there were five, if i’m not mistaken—it could have been seven; i think it was five—members of the united states senate—open members of the klan. multiple governors who were open members of the klan. most people didn’t realize that, a century ago, the klan was founded just six years before the horrific destruction here in tulsa. and one of the reasons why it was founded was because of guys like me, who were catholic. it wasn’t about african americans, then; it was about making sure that all those polish and irish and italian and eastern european catholics who came to the united states after world war one would not pollute christianity. the flames from those burning crosses torched every region—region of the country. millions of white americans belonged to the klan, and they weren’t even embarrassed by it; they were proud of it. and that hate became embedded systematically and systemically in our laws and our culture. we do ourselves no favors by pretending none of this ever happened or that it doesn’t impact us today, because it does still impact us today. we can’t just choose to learn what we want to know and not what we should know. (applause.) we should know the good, the bad, everything. that’s what great nations do: they come to terms with their dark sides. and we’re a great nation. the only way to build a common ground is to truly repair and to rebuild. i come here to help fill the silence, because in silence, wounds deepen. (applause.) and only—as painful as it is, only in remembrance do wounds heal. we just have to choose to remember. we memorialize what happened here in tulsa so it can be –so it can’t be erased. we know here, in this hallowed place, we simply can’t bury pain and trauma forever. and at some point, there will be a reckoning, an inflection point, like we’re facing right now as a nation. what many people hadn’t seen before or ha-—or simply refused to see cannot be ignored any longer. you see it in so many places. and there’s greater recognition that, for too long, we’ve allowed a narrowed, cramped view of the promise of this nation to fester—the view that america is a zero-sum game where there is only one winner. “if you succeed, i fail. if you get ahead, i fall behind. if you get a job, i lose mine.” and maybe worst of all, “if i hold you down, i lift myself up,” instead of “if you do well, we all do well.” (applause.) we see that in greenwood. this story isn’t about the loss of life, but a loss of living, of wealth and prosterity [prosperity] and possibilities that still reverberates today. mother fletcher talks about how she was only able to attend school until the fourth grade and eventually found work in the shipyards, as a domestic worker. mr. van ellis has shared how, even after enlisting and serving in world war two, he still came home to struggle with a segregated america. imagine all those hotels and dinners [diners] and mom-and-pop shops that could been—have been passed down this past hundred years. imagine what could have been done for black families in greenwood: financial security and generational wealth. if you come from backgrounds like my—my family—a working-class, middle-class family—the only way we were ever able to generate any wealth was in equity in our homes. imagine what they contributed then and what they could’ve contributed all these years. imagine a thriving greenwood in north tulsa for the last hundred years, what that would’ve meant for all of tulsa, including the white community. while the people of greenwood rebuilt again in the years after the massacre, it didn’t last. eventually neighborhoods were redlined on maps, locking black tulsa out of homeownerships. (applause.) a highway was built right through the heart of the community. lisa, i was talking about our west side—what 95 did to it after we were occupied by the military, after dr. king was murdered. the community—cutting off black families and businesses from jobs and opportunity. chronic underinvestment from state and federal governments denied greenwood even just a chance at rebuilding. (applause.) we must find the courage to change the things we know we can change. that’s what vice president harris and i are focused on, along with our entire administration, including our housing and urban development secretary, marcia fudge, who is here today. (applause.) because today, we’re announcing two expanded efforts targeted toward black wealth creation that will also help the entire community. the first is: my administration has launched an aggressive effort to combat racial discrimination in housing. that includes everything from redlining to the cruel fact that a home owned by a black family is too often appraised at a lower value than a similar home owned by a white family. (applause.) and i might add—and i need help if you have an answer to this; i can’t figure this one out, congressman horsford. but if you live in a black community and there’s another one on the other side of the highway—it’s a white community; it’s the—built by the same builder, and you have a better driving record than they guy with the same car in the white community, you’re—can pay more for your auto insurance. shockingly, the percentage of black american homeownership is lower today in america than when the fair housing act was passed more than 50 years ago. lower today. that’s wrong. and we’re committing to changing that. just imagine if instead of denying millions of americans the ability to own their own home and build generational wealth, we made it possible for them to buy a home and build equity into that—into that home and provide for their families. second, small businesses are the engines of our economy and the glue of our communities. as president, my administration oversees hundreds of billions of dollars in federal contracts for everything from refurbishing decks of aircraft carriers, to installing railings in federal buildings, to professional services. we have a thing called—i won’t go into it all because there’s not enough time now. but i’m determined to use every taxpayer’s dollar that is assigned to me to spend, going to american companies and american workers to build ameri– to build american products. and as part of that, i’m going to increase the share of the dollars the federal government spends to small, disadvantaged businesses, including black and brown small businesses. right now, it calls for 10 percent; i’m going to move that to 15 percent of every dollar spent will be spent (inaudible). (applause.) i have the authority to do that. just imagine if, instead of denying millions of entrepreneurs the ability to access capital and contracting, we made it possible to take their dreams to the marketplace to create jobs and invest in our communities. that—the data shows young black entrepreneurs are just as capable of succeeding, given the chance, as white entrepreneurs are. but they don’t have lawyers. they don’t have—they—they don’t have accountants, but they have great ideas. does anyone doubt this whole nation would be better off from the investments those people make? and i promise you, that’s why i set up the—a national small business administration that’s much broader. because they’re going to get those loans. instead of consigning millions of american children to under-resourced schools, let’s give each and every child, three and four years old, access to school—not daycare, school. (applause.) in the last 10 years, studies have been done by all the great universities. it shows that, if increased by 56 percent, the possibility of a child—no matter what background they come from; no matter what—if they start school at three years old, they have a 56 percent chance of going all through all 12 years without any trouble and being able to do well, and a chance to learn and grow and thrive in a school and throughout their lives. and let’s unlock more than—an incredible creativity and innovation that will come from the nation’s historically black colleges and universities. (applause.) i have a $5 billion program giving them the resources to invest in research centers and laboratories and high-demand fields to compete for the good-paying jobs in industries like—of the future, like cybersecurity. the reason why they don’t—their—their students are equally able to learn as well, and get the good-paying job that start at 90- and 100,000 bucks. but they don’t have—they don’t have the back—they don’t have the money to provide and build those laboratories. so, guess what? they’re going to get the money to build those laboratories. (applause.) so, instead of just talking about infrastructure, let’s get about the—about the business of actually rebuilding roads and highways, filling the sidewalks and cracks, installing streetlights and high-speed internet, creating space—space to live and work and play safely. let’s ensure access to healthcare, clean water, clean air, nearby grocery stores—stock the fresh vegetables and food that—(applause)—in fact, deal with—i mean, these are all things we can do. does anyone doubt this whole nation would be better off with these investments? the rich will be just as well off. the middle class will do better, and everybody will do better. it’s about good-paying jobs, financial stability, and being able to build some generational wealth. it’s about economic growth for our country and outcompeting the rest of the world, which is now outcompeting us. but just as fundamental as any of these investments i’ve discussed—this may be the most fundamental: the right to vote. (applause.) the right to vote. (applause.) a lot of the members of the black caucus knew john lewis better than i did, but i knew him. on his deathbed, like many, i called john, to speak to him. but all john wanted to do was talk about how i was doing. he died, i think, about 25 hours later. but you know what john said? he called the right to vote “precious,” “almost sacred.” he said, “the most powerful nonviolent tool we have in a democratic society”. this sacred right is under assault with an incredible intensity like i’ve never seen—even though i got started as a public defender and a civil rights lawyer—with an intensity and an aggressiveness that we have not seen in a long, long time. it’s simply un-american. it is not, however, sadly, unprecedented. the creed “we shall overcome” is a longtime mainstay of the civil rights movement, as jesse jackson can tell you better than anybody. the obstacle to proc-—to progress that have to be overcome are a constant challenge. we saw it in the ‘60s, but with the current assault, it’s not just an echo of a distant history. in 2020, we faced a tireless assault on the right to vote: restrictive laws, lawsuits, threats of intimidation, voter purges, and more. we resolved to overcome it all, and we did. more americans voted in the last election than any—in the midst of a pandemic—than any election in american history. (applause.) you got voters registered. you got voters to the polls. the rule of law held. democracy prevailed. we overcame. but today, let me be unequivocal: i’ve been engaged in this work my whole career, and we’re going to be ramping up our efforts to overcome again. i will have more to say about this at a later date—the truly unprecedented assault on our democracy, an effort to replace nonpartisan election administrators and to intimidate those charged with tallying and reporting the election results. but today, as for the act of voting itself, i urge voting rights groups in this country to begin to redouble their efforts now to register and educate voters. (applause.) and in june—june should be a month of action on capitol hill. i hear all the folks on tv saying, “why doesn’t biden get this done?” well, because biden only has a majority of, effectively, four votes in the house and a tie in the senate, with two members of the senate who vote more with my republican friends. but we’re not giving up. earlier this year, the house of representatives passed for the people act to protect our democracy. the senate will take it up later this month, and i’m going to fight like heck with every tool at my disposal for its passage. the house is also working on the john lewis voting rights act, which is—which is critical—(applause)—to providing new legal tools to combat the new assault on the right to vote. to signify the importance of our efforts, today i’m asking vice president harris to help these efforts and lead them, among her many other responsibilities. with her leadership and your support, we’re going to overcome again, i promise you. but it’s going to take a hell of a lot of work. (applause.) and finally, we have to—and finally, we must address what remains the stain on the soul of america. what happened in greenwood was an act of hate and domestic terrorism with a through line that exists today still. just close your eyes and remember what you saw in charlottesville four years ago on television. neo-nazis, white supremacists, the kkk coming out of those fields at night in virginia with lighted torches—the veins bulging on their—as they were screaming. remember? just close your eyes and picture what it was. well, mother fletcher said when she saw the insurrection at the capitol on january the 9th [6th], it broke her heart—a mob of violent white extremists—thugs. said it reminded her what happened here in greenwood 100 years ago. look around at the various hate crimes against asian americans and jewish americans. hate that never goes away. hate only hides. jesse, i think i mentioned this to you. i thought, after you guys pushed through, with dr. king, the voting rights act and the civil rights act—i thought we moved. but what i didn’t realize—i thought we had made enormous progress, and i was so proud to be a little part of it. but you know what, rev? i didn’t realize hate is never defeated; it only hides. it hides. and given a little bit of oxygen—just a little bit oxygen—by its leaders, it comes out of there from under the rock like it was happening again, as if it never went away. and so, folks, we can’t—we must not give hate a safe harbor. as i said in my address to the joint session of congress: according to the intelligence community, terrorism from white supremacy is the most lethal threat to the homeland today. not isis, not al qaeda—white supremacists. (applause.) that’s not me; that’s the intelligence community under both trump and under my administration. two weeks ago, i signed into law the covid-19 hate crimes act, which the house had passed and the senate. my administration will soon lay out our broader strategy to counter domestic terrorism and the violence driven by the most heinous hate crimes and other forms of vigorty [sic]—of bigotry. but i’m going to close where i started. to mother randle, mother fletcher, mr. van ellis, to the descendants, and to all survivors: thank you. thank you for giving me the honor of being able to spend some time with you earlier today. thank you for your courage. thank you for your commitment. and thank your children, and your grandchildren, and your unc-—and your nieces and your nephews. to see and learn from you is a gift—a genuine gift. dr. john hope franklin, one of america’s greatest historians—tulsa’s proud son, whose father was a greenwood survivor—said, and i quote, “whatever you do, it must be done in the spirit of goodwill and mutual respect and even love. how else can we overcome the past and be worthy of our forebearers and face the future with confidence and with hope?” on this sacred and solemn day, may we find that distinctly greenwood spirit that defines the american spirit—the spirit that gives me so much confidence and hope for the future; that helps us see, face to face; a spirit that helps us know fully who we are and who we can be as a people and as a nation. i’ve never been more optimistic about the future than i am today. i mean that. and the reason is because of this new generation of young people. they’re the best educated, they’re the least prejudiced, the most open generation in american history. and although i have no scientific basis of what i’m about to say, but those of you who are over 50—how often did you ever see—how often did you ever see advertisements on television with black and white couples? not a joke. i challenge you—find today, when you turn on the stations—sit on one station for two hours. and i don’t know how many commercials you’ll see—eight to five—two to three out of five have mixed-race couples in them. that’s not by accident. they’re selling soap, man. (laughter.) not a joke. remember ol’ pat caddell? he used to say, “you want to know what’s happening in american culture? watch advertising, because they want to sell what they have.” we have hope in folks like you, honey. i really mean it. we have hope. but we’ve got to give them support. we have got to give them the backbone to do what we know has to be done. because i doubt whether any of you would be here if you didn’t care deeply about this. you sure in the devil didn’t come to hear me speak. (laughter.) but i really mean it. i really mean it. let’s not give up, man. let’s not give up. as the old saying goes, “hope springs eternal.” i know we’ve talked a lot about famous people, but i’m—my colleagues in the senate used to kid me because i was always quoting irish poets. they think i did it because i’m irish. they think i did it because we irish—we have a little chip on our shoulder. a little bit, sometimes. that’s not why i did it; i did it because they’re the best poets in the world. (laughter.) you can smile, it’s okay. it’s true. there was a famous poet who wrote a poem called “the cure at troy”—seamus heaney. and there is a stanza in it that i think is the definition of what i think should be our call today for young people. it said, “history teaches us not to hope on this side of the grave, but then, once in a lifetime, the longed-for tidal wave of justice rises up, and hope and history rhyme.” let’s make it rhyme. thank you. thank you, thank you, thank you. (applause.) thank you. thank you, heather. thank you, thank you, thank you. (laughs.) well, thank you. heather, you thought — you’re surprised you’re standing here. (laughter.) jill was very surprised i’m standing here. (laughter.) well, heather, thank you for the introduction. and i can’t look over here because the sun is shining in my eyes, but all this other crowd over here — and thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you for all you’ve done. (applause.) look, thanks for sharing this day with us — why this day matters to you and our fellow — your fellow iron workers and your families. and you explained it well. and for all the folks at home, i know this day matters to you as well. i know you’re tired of the bickering in washington, frustrated by the negativity, and you just want us to use and focus on your needs, your concerns, and the conversations that are taking place at your kitchen table — conversation as profound as they are ordinary. how do i find work? and how do i get there? how can our small business thrive and our child succeed in school? or how do we emerge from this pandemic not just with a little bit of breathing room, but with a real fighting chance to get ahead? when we ran for president, to help — i thought maybe i could help answer some of those questions for you and the needs you have. because every time i’d ride home on amtrak, i’d go through just north of — just south of baltimore. i’d look out as it would go through a suburban neighborhood. i’d look in those — all those lights were on in the windows, nance, and i’d look and i’d wonder, “what are they talking about?” i’m serious. i swear to god. “what are they talking about sitting at that table? what are they talking about?” they’re talking about the things that i talked about at our kitchen table, jill at hers, and all of you as well. ask about, “how can we come together to be president for all americans, to make sure our democracy delivers for you, for all of you?” and i promised that we couldn’t just build back to what it was before. we literally had to build back better. you couldn’t build back — we’re the only country that’s always come out of great crises stronger than when we went in. and the world has changed, and we have to be ready. my fellow americans, today, i want you to know: we hear you, and we see you. (applause.) the bill i’m about to sign into law is proof that despite the cynics, democrats and republicans can come together and deliver results. (applause.) we can do this. we can deliver real results for real people. we see in ways that really matter each and every day, to each person out there. and we’re taking a monumental step forward to build back better as a nation. i want to thank everyone who helped make this happen: vice president harris, my cabinet members, my white house team, jill, doug, our first lady, and our — first lady and our second husband. no, i’m joking. (laughter.) these guys travel all over the country together. i’m getting worried, you know. (laughter.) and doug is one hell of a lawyer besides. and everybody from the united states senate — majority leader schumer and a group of senate democrats and republicans have established this bipartisan framework, including representatives and all the folks you heard from. senator rob portman is a really — hell of a good guy. i — i’m not hurting you, rob, because i know you’re not running again. (laughter.) that’s the only reason i say it. but you are a hell of a good guy. and the most determined woman i know: senator kyrsten sinema. congratulations, kyrsten. look, committee chair tom carper, ranking member shelley moore capito. i also want to thank minority leader mitch mcconnell for voting for this bill and talking about how useful and important it is. and from the house of representatives: speaker pelosi — (applause); steny hoyer — (applause); jim clyburn — (applause); and committee chair pete defazio. (applause.) democrats and republicans. progressives and moderates. i’d like to pause and ask all the committee chairs and ranking members of the united states senate and house that are here today — please stand. would all of you stand? come on. (applause.) all right. thank you, thank you, thank you. to state the obvious, none of this would have happened without all of you. i really mean it. and also to the governors — where are the governors? governors, stand up. come on. i want you to stand up. (applause.) red states, blue states — you all contacted me. you all said you were for this. you all stepped up. and more than 375 mayors — democrats and republicans — (applause) — from every state and district of columbia wrote me asking to get this done. you got it, kid. (laughs.) and nearly 50 of whom are here today, including republican mayor of fontana who — from calif- — from fontana — from calif- — fontana, california, mayor warren, who spoke earlier. and the county and state and tribal leaders as well — civil rights leaders, faith leaders. law — you know, this law was supported by business groups — the u.s. chamber of commerce; the national association of manufacturers; the business roundtable, representing 200 of the largest corporations in america and other top business. i want to especially thank — and i’m sure you all — as we used to say in the senate –- i’d say, “a point of personal privilege” — i want to thank organized labor –- (applause) – who understand this about jobs. you all stood up. jobs! jobs! jobs! jobs! special thanks to the afl-cio; the united auto workers; electric workers, the ibew; the iron workers — it goes on — plumbers, pipe fitters, and the building trades, steel workers, mach- — who did i leave out? (laughs.) pardon me? and my wife is a member of a union, the nea. (applause.) i’m going to get in trouble. machinists — so many more. look folks, for too long, we’ve talked about having the best economy in the world. we’ve talked about asserting american leadership around the world with the best and the safest roads, railroads, ports, airports. here in washington, we’ve heard countless speeches and promises and white papers from experts. but today, we’re finally getting this done. (applause.) so my message to the american people is this: america is moving again, and your life is going to change for the better. if you live in one of the top — if you live in one of the 10 million homes or your child attends one of the 400,000 schools or childcare centers that still has lead pipes in them, you face a clear and present danger to your child’s health and your health now. this law is going to start to replace 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines –- (applause) — so every american, every child can turn on the faucet and drink clean water. and tens of thousands of plumbers and pipefitters are going to get work done in good-paying jobs. folks, as — as we saw with remote learning, remote working during the pandemic, access to high-speed internet is essential — and access to water — as essential as access to water and electricity. this law is going to make high-speed internet affordable and available everywhere — everywhere in america — urban suburban, rural — and create jobs laying down those broadband lines. no parent — no parent — (coughs) — excuse me — no parent should have to sit in a parking lot at a fast-food restaurant again just so their child can use the internet to do their homework. that’s over. (applause.) and, folks, if i visited your town, i’m sure you’d be able to tell me and — where you hold your breath as you cross the particular bridge or where the most dangerous intersection of your town is. this law makes this the most significant investment in roads and bridges in the past 70 years. it makes the most significant investment in passenger rail in the past 50 years and in public transit ever. so, what — what that means is you’re going to be safer, and you’re going to get there faster, and we’re going to have a whole hell of a lot pollution — less pollution in the air. the bipartisan law will modernize our ports, our airports, our freight rail to make it easier for companies to get goods to market; reduce supply chain bottlenecks, as we’re experiencing now; and lower cost for you and your family. the law also builds on our resilience so that the next storm — superstorm, drought, wildfire, hurricane — can be dealt with. last year alone, the united states, as a consequence of these kind of extreme weather events, lost $99 billion in the united states alone in damage. after hurricane ida — i see the distinguished governor from louisiana is over there; i saw him stand up — i went down to see him. we went through and saw all the damage there. they had 179-mile-an-hour winds at top speed in louisiana. but then i headed on up to new york — chuck, up in your area — into queens and new jersey. more people died there than in a hurricane. more people died with the flooding. record wildfires raged and went — i went to idaho and california and saw it. more land has burned to the ground than the entire state of new jersey out west. folks –- walk the neighborhoods and look the people in the eye in these circumstances, as many of you have, and you’ll see the despair and the heartache. so many of you understand; you’re living through it. this law builds back our bridges, our water systems, our powerlines, our levees better and stronger so few americans will be flooded out of their homes or lose power in those days and weeks that comes with the storms that hit. folks, this bipartisan law, for the first time ever, creates a true national network of charging stations for electric vehicles — over 500,000 of them — (applause) — so you can charge your car here and drive all the way to california not worrying about having to find places to charge, creating thousands of jobs — thousands. it is also going to make it possible for americans to get off the sidelines and into the game of manufacturing solar panels, wind turbines, batteries to store energy and power for electric vehicles, including electric school buses, which will mean millions of children will no longer inhale the dangerous diesel fumes that come out of the buses. (applause.) for real. it’s a big deal. and it’ll reward companies for paying good wages and for buying american, sourcing their products here in america right now. it’s going to help the united states export clean energy technologies to the world, creating mil- — tens of thousands of more jobs. there’s so much more in the law, but, most of all, it does something truly historic. i ran for president believing it was time to rebuild the backbone of this nation, which i characterized as working people in the middle class — they’re the ones who built the country — and to rebuild the economy from the bottom up in the middle out. this law delivers on that long-overdue promise, in my view. it creates better jobs for millions of americans. and no one — no one earning less than $400,000 a year will pay a single penny in federal taxes because of it. (applause.) and it does not include — as we did the bipartisan infrastructure bill, it does not include a single penny in gas tax, which i rejected because people under $400,000 would be paying it. this law is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild america. it leaves no one behind. and it makes — it marks an inflection point that we face as a nation. for most of the 20th century, we led the world by a significant margin because we invested in ourselves. but somewhere along the way, we stopped investing in ourselves. we’ve risked losing our edge as a nation, and china and the rest of the world are catching up. our infrastructure used to be rated the best in the world. now, according to the world economic forum, we rank 13th in the world. well, that’s about to change. (applause.) things are going to turn around in a big way. for example, because of this law, next year will be the first year in 20 years american infrastructure investment will grow faster than china’s. we’ll once again have the best roads, bridges, ports, and airports over the next decade. and we’ll lead the world into the 21st century with modern cars and trucks and transit systems. we’re going to do this by building again and moving again. folks, too often in washington the reason we didn’t get things done is because we insisted on getting everything we want — everything. with this law, we focus on getting things done. i ran for president because the only way to move this country forward, in my view, was through compromise and consensus. that’s how the system works. that’s american democracy. and i’m going to be signing a law that is truly consequential because we made our democracy deliver for the american people. we compromised. we reached a consensus. that’s necessary. and now, our focus moves to implementing an infrastructure law that’s going to — with speed and with discipline. i have a lot of experience in doing that. when i was vice president, i was given responsibility for overseeing and implementing the recovery act, a nearly $900 billion emergency package. i’m proud to say that when we finished implementing that recovery act, it was determined that there had been less than two tenths of 1 percent waste, fraud, or abuse. and i was — it was how i learned and earned the nickname “sheriff joe” from president obama. because i made it a point, every single day for well over a year, to stay on top of how the money was being used. i spoke with over 160 mayors — two, three times sometimes. and i spoke with county executives and every governor save one — i won’t mention that; save one — (laughter) — she could see alaska from her porch, but — monitor what we’re doing, just how it was being done. and it was one of the most efficient implementations of a major program in american history. and now we owe it to the american people to do the same thing again. and to make sure every penny is spent where it’s supposed to go in a timely fashion, i’ve asked the former mayor of new orleans and former lieutenant governor of louisiana, mitch landrieu, to oversee this responsibility. (applause.) he’ll have full access to every tool the federal government has to get it done. and we have — we have the high obligation and responsibility to make sure this money is used wisely and used well. folks, i’ve been looking forward to this day for a long time like all of my colleagues here have. tomorrow, i’ll be traveling to new hampshire to visit a bridge that is structurally not safe, like thousands of bridges across america. that’s what this law is all about: keeping communities safer and more efficient. on wednesday, i’ll be in detroit to meet with the uaw workers who are building the next generation of electric vehicles. and that’s just the beginning. we’re also seeing me and the vice — you’ll be seeing me and the vice president harris, jill and doug, cabinet officials hitting the road to help you understand how this is going to transform your lives for the better. and, folks, when you see those projects start in your hometowns, i want you to feel what i feel: pride — pride in what we can do together as the united states of america. folks, you know, the same goes for my plan to build back better for the people — getting folks back to work and reducing costs of things like childcare, eldercare, housing, healthcare, prescription drugs, and meeting the moment on climate change. i’m confident that the house will pass this bill, and then we’re going to have to pass it in the senate. and it’s fully paid for. it will reduce the deficit over the long term, according to leading economists in the world. and again, no one earning less than $400,000 will pay a single penny more in federal taxes. and together — together with the infrastructure bill, millions of lives will be changed for the better. folks, let me close with this: throughout our history, we’ve emerged from crises by investing in ourselves. during and after the civil war, it’s been referenced, we built the transcontinental railroad, uniting east and west and uniting america. during the cold war, we built the interstate highway system, transforming how america lived their lives. and now, we’re emerging from the covid-19 pandemic, and we’ll build an economy for the 21st century. when i met with the president of china — who i’m going to be speaking with tonight — several years ago, he asked me — we were in china — he asked me — he said: could i define america? and i said, “absolutely.” it’s the god’s truth. i said, “absolutely. i can define it in one word: possibilities. possibilities.” there is no limit to what our people think we can do. and there is no limit to what our nation can do. and there is no one thing that i know more than this: it’s never, ever been a good bet to bet against the american people. never, never, never. (applause.) given half a chance, the american people have never, ever, ever, ever let this nation down. and it’s our job to give our people that chance. it’s our job to come together and make sure we remain a nation of possibilities. as i look out on this crowd today, i see democrats and republicans, national leaders, local leaders, all elected officials, labor leaders, business leaders, and, most of all, i see fellow americans. i see america. let’s remember this day. let’s remember we can come together. and most of all, let’s remember what we got done for the american people when we do come together. i truly believe that 50 years from now, historians are going to look back at this moment and say, “that’s the moment america began to win the competition of the 21st century.” so, with confidence, optimism, with vision and faith in each other, let’s believe in possibilities. let’s believe in one another. and let’s believe in america. god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. (applause.) now let me sign this bipartisan bill. (applause.) (the bill is signed.) (applause.) thank you, thank you, thank you. thanks, everybody. 4:21 p.m. est Transcript
Good evening, my fellow Americans. We’re facing an inflection point in history—one of those moments where the decisions we make today are going to determine the future for decades to come. That’s what I’d like to talk with you about tonight.You know, earlier this morning, I returned from Israel. They tell me I’m the first American president to travel there during a war.I met with the Prime Minister and members of his cabinet. And most movingly, I met with Israelis who had personally lived through horrific horror of the attack by Hamas on the 7th of October.More than 1,300 people slaughtered in Israel, including at least 32 American citizens. Scores of innocents—from infants to elderly grandparents, Israelis, Americans—taken hostage.As I told the families of Americans being held captive by Hamas, we’re pursuing every avenue to bring their loved ones home. As President, there is no higher priority for me than the safety of Americans held hostage.The terrorist group Hamas unleashed pure, unadulterated evil in the world. But sadly, the Jewish people know, perhaps better than anyone, that there is no limit to the depravity of people when they want to inflict pain on others.In Israel, I saw a people who are strong, determined, resilient, and also angry, in shock, and in deep, deep pain.I also spoke with President Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and reiterated that the United States remains committed to the Palestinian people’s right to dignity and to self-determination. The actions of Hamas terrorists don’t take that right away.Like so many other, I am heartbroken by the tragic loss of Palestinian life, including the explosion at a hospital in Gaza—which was not done by the Israelis.We mourn every innocent life lost. We can’t ignore the humanity of innocent Palestinians who only want to live in peace and have an opportunity.You know, the assault on Israel echoes nearly 20 months of war, tragedy, and brutality inflicted on the people of Ukraine—people that were very badly hurt since Putin launched his all-out invasion.We’ve have not forgotten the mass graves, the bodies found bearing signs of torture, rape used as a weapon by the Russians, and thousands and thousands of Ukrainian children forcibly taken into Russia, stolen from their parents. It’s sick.Hamas and Putin represent different threats, but they share this in common: They both want to completely annihilate a neighboring democracy—completely annihilate it.Hamas—its stated purpose for existing is the destruction of the State of Israel and the murder of Jewish people.Hamas does not represent the Palestinian people. Hamas uses Palestinian civilians as human shields, and innocent Palestinian families are suffering greatly because of them.Meanwhile, Putin denies Ukraine has or ever had real statehood. He claims the Soviet Union created Ukraine. And just two weeks ago, he told the world that if the United States and our allies withdraw—and if the United States withdraw, our allies will as well—military support for Ukraine, it would have, quote, “a week left to live.” But we’re not withdrawing.I know these conflicts can seem far away. And it’s natural to ask: Why does this matter to America?So let me share with you why making sure Israel and Ukraine succeed is vital for America’s national security. You know, history has taught us that when terrorists don’t pay a price for their terror, when dictators don’t pay a price for their aggression, they cause more chaos and death and more destruction. They keep going, and the cost and the threats to America and to the world keep rising.So, if we don’t stop Putin’s appetite for power and control in Ukraine, he won’t limit himself just to Ukraine. He’s—Putin has already threated to “remind”—quote, “remind” Poland that their western land was a gift from Russia.One of his top advisors, a former president of Russia, has called Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania Russia’s “Baltic provinces.” These are all NATO Allies.For 75 years, NATO has kept peace in Europe and has been the cornerstone of American security. And if Putin attacks a NATO Ally, we will defend every inch of NATO which the treaty requires and calls for.We will have something that we do not seek—make it clear: we do not seek—we do not seek to have American troops fighting in Russia or fighting against Russia.Beyond Europe, we know that our allies and, maybe most importantly, our adversaries and competitors are watching. They’re watching our response in Ukraine as well.And if we walk away and let Putin erase Ukraine’s independence, would-be aggressors around the world would be emboldened to try the same. The risk of conflict and chaos could spread in other parts of the world—in the Indo-Pacific, in the Middle East—especially in the Middle East.Iran is—is supporting Russia in Ukraine, and it’s supporting Hamas and other terrorist groups in the region. And we’ll continue to hold them accountable, I might add.The United States and our partners across the region are working to build a better future for the Middle East, one where the Middle East is more stable, better connected to its neighbors, and—through innovative projects like the India-Middle East-Europe rail corridor that I announced this year at the summit of the world’s biggest economies. More predictable markets, more employment, less rage, less grievances, less war when connected. It benefits the people—it would benefit the people of the Middle East, and it would benefit us.American leadership is what holds the world together. American alliances are what keep us, America, safe. American values are what make us a partner that other nations want to work with. To put all that at risk if we walk away from Ukraine, if we turn our backs on Israel, it’s just not worth it.That’s why, tomorrow, I’m going to send to Congress an urgent budget request to fund America’s national security needs, to support our critical partners, including Israel and Ukraine.It’s a smart investment that’s going to pay dividends for American security for generations, help us keep American troops out of harm’s way, help us build a world that is safer, more peaceful, and more prosperous for our children and grandchildren.In Israel, we must make sure that they have what they need to protect their people today and always.The security package I’m sending to Congress and asking Congress to do is an unprecedented commitment to Israel’s security that will sharpen Israel’s qualitative military edge, which we’ve committed to—the qualitative military edge.We’re going to make sure Iron Dome continues to guard the skies over Israel. We’re going to make sure other hostile actors in the region know that Israel is stronger than ever and prevent this conflict from spreading.Look, at the same time, Prime Minister Netanyahu and I discussed again yesterday the critical need for Israel to operate by the laws of war. That means protecting civilians in combat as best as they can. The people of Gaza urgently need food, water, and medicine.Yesterday, in discussions with the leaders of Israel and Egypt, I secured an agreement for the first shipment of humanitarian assistance from the United Nations to Palestinian civilians in Gaza.If Hamas does not divert or steal this shipment—these shipments, we’re going to provide an opening for sustained delivery of lifesaving humanitarian assistance for the Palestinians.And as I said in Israel: As hard as it is, we cannot give up on peace. We cannot give up on a two-state solution.Israel and Palestinians equally deserve to live in safety, dignity, and peace.You know, and here at home, we have to be honest with ourselves. In recent years, too much hate has been given too much oxygen, fueling racism, a rise in antisemitism and Islamophobia right here in America.It’s also intensified in the wake of recent events that led to the horrific threats and attacks that both shock us and break our hearts.On October 7th, terror attacks have triggered deep scars and terrible memories in the Jewish community.Today, Jewish families worried about being targeted in school, wearing symbols of their faith walking down the street, or going out about their daily lives.You know, I know many of you in the Muslim American community or the Arab American community, the Palestinian American community, and so many others are outraged and hurting, saying to yourselves, “Here we go again,” with Islamophobia and distrust we saw after 9/11.Just last week, a mother was brutally stabbed, a little boy—here in the United States—a little boy who had just turned six years old was murdered in their home outside of Chicago.His name was Wadea—Wadea—a proud American, a proud Palestinian American family.We can’t stand by and stand silent when this happens. We must, without equivocation, denounce antisemitism. We must also, without equivocation, denounce Islamophobia.And to all of you hurting—those of you who are hurting, I want you to know: I see you. You belong. And I want to say this to you: You’re all America. You’re all America.This is in a moment where there’s—you know, in moments like these, when fear and suspicion, anger and rage run hard, that we have to work harder than ever to hold on to the values that make us who we are.We’re a nation of religious freedom, freedom of expression. We all have a right to debate and disagree without fear of being targeted at schools or workplaces or in our communities.And we must renounce violence and vitriol, see each other not as enemies but as—but as fellow Americans.When I was in Israel yesterday, I said that when America experienced the hell of 9/11, we felt enraged as well. While we sought and got justice, we made mistakes. So, I cautioned the government of Israel not to be blinded by rage.And here in America, let us not forget who we are. We reject all forms—all forms of hate, whether against Muslims, Jews, or anyone. That’s what great nations do, and we are great nation.On Ukraine, I’m asking Congress to make sure we can continue to send Ukraine the weapons they need to defend themselves and their country without interruption so Ukraine can stop Putin’s brutality in Ukraine.They are succeeding.When Putin invaded Ukraine, he thought he would take Kyiv and all of Ukraine in a matter of days. Well, over a year later, Putin has failed, and he continues to fail. Kyiv still stands because of the bravery of the Ukrainian people.Ukraine has regained more than 50 percent of the territory that Russian troops once occupied, backed by a U.S.-led coalition of more than 50 countries around the world all doing its part to support Kyiv.What would happen if we walked away? We are the essential nation.Meanwhile, Putin has turned to Iran and North Korea to buy attack drones and ammunition to terrorize Ukrainian cities and people.From the outset, I have said I will not send American troops to fight in Ukraine.All Ukraine is asking for is help—for the weapons, munitions, the capacity, the capability to push invading Russian forces off their land, and the air defense systems to shoot down Russian missiles before they destroy Ukrainian cities.And let me be clear about something: We send Ukraine equipment sitting in our stockpiles. And when we use the money allocated by Congress, we use it to replenish our own stores—our own stockpiles with new equipment—equipment that defends America and is made in America: Patriot missiles for air defense batteries made in Arizona; artillery shells manufactured in 12 states across the country—in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Texas; and so much more.You know, just as in World War Two, today, patriotic American workers are building the arsenal of democracy and serving the cause of freedom.Let me close with this. Earlier this year, I boarded Air Force One for a secret flight to Poland. There, I boarded a train with blacked-out windows for a 10-hour ride each way to Kyiv to stand with the people of Ukraine ahead of the one-year anniversary of their brave fight against Putin.I’m told I was the first American [president] to enter a warzone not controlled by the United States military since President Lincoln.With me was just a small group of security personnel and a few advisors.But when I exited that train and met Zelenskyy—President Zelenskyy, I didn’t feel alone. I was bringing with me the idea of America, the promise of America to the people who are today fighting for the same things we fought for 250 years ago: freedom, independence, self-determination.And as I walked through Kyiv with President Zelenskyy, with air raid sirens sounding in the distance, I felt something I’ve always believed more strongly than ever before: America is a beacon to the world still. Still.We are, as my friend Madeleine Albright said, “the indispensable nation.”Tonight, there are innocent people all over the world who hope because of us, who believe in a better life because of us, who are desperate not be forgotten by us, and who are waiting for us.But time is of the essence.I know we have our divisions at home. We have to get past them. We can’t let petty, partisan, angry politics get in the way of our responsibilities as a great nation.We cannot and will not let terrorists like Hamas and tyrants like Putin win. I refuse to let that happen.In moments like these, we have to remind, we have to remember who we are. We are the United States of America—the United States of America. And there is nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together.My fellow Americans, thank you for your time.May God bless you all. And may God protect our troops.


View Transcriptmadam vice president, my fellow americans: to state the obvious, one year ago today, in this sacred place, democracy was attacked—simply attacked. the will of the people was under assault. the constitution—our constitution—faced the gravest of threats. outnumbered and in the face of a brutal attack, the capitol police, the dc metropolitan police department, the national guard, and other brave law enforcement officials saved the rule of law. our democracy held. we the people endured. and we the people prevailed. for the first time in our history, a president had not just lost an election, he tried to prevent the peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob breached the capitol. but they failed. they failed. and on this day of remembrance, we must make sure that such an attack never, never happens again. i’m speaking to you today from statuary hall in the united states capitol. this is where the house of representatives met for 50 years in the decades leading up to the civil war. this is—on this floor is where a young congressman of illinois, abraham lincoln, sat at desk 191. above him—above us, over that door leading into the rotunda—is a sculpture depicting clio, the muse of history. in her hands, an open book in which she records the events taking place in this chamber below. clio stood watch over this hall one year ago today, as she has for more than 200 years. she recorded what took place. the real history. the real facts. the real truth. the facts and the truth that vice president harris just shared and that you and i and the whole world saw with our own eyes. the bible tells us that we shall know the truth, and the truth shall make us free. we shall know the truth. well, here is the god’s truth about january 6th, 2021: close your eyes. go back to that day. what do you see? rioters rampaging, waving for the first time inside this capitol a confederate flag that symbolized the cause to destroy america, to rip us apart. even during the civil war, that never, ever happened. but it happened here in 2021. what else do you see? a mob breaking windows, kicking in doors, breaching the capitol. american flags on poles being used as weapons, as spears. fire extinguishers being thrown at the heads of police officers. a crowd that professes their love for law enforcement assaulted those police officers, dragged them, sprayed them, stomped on them. over 140 police officers were injured. we’ve all heard the police officers who were there that day testify to what happened. one officer called it, quote, a med-—“medieval” battle, and that he was more afraid that day than he was fighting the war in iraq. they’ve repeatedly asked since that day: how dare anyone—anyone—diminish, belittle, or deny the hell they were put through? we saw it with our own eyes. rioters menaced these halls, threatening the life of the speaker of the house, literally erecting gallows to hang the vice president of the united states of america. but what did we not see? we didn’t see a former president, who had just rallied the mob to attack—sitting in the private dining room off the oval office in the white house, watching it all on television and doing nothing for hours as police were assaulted, lives at risk, and the nation’s capital under siege. this wasn’t a group of tourists. this was an armed insurrection. they weren’t looking to uphold the will of the people. they were looking to deny the will of the people. they were looking to uphold—they weren’t looking to uphold a free and fair election. they were looking to overturn one. they weren’t looking to save the cause of america. they were looking to subvert the constitution. this isn’t about being bogged down in the past. this is about making sure the past isn’t buried. that’s the only way forward. that’s what great nations do. they don’t bury the truth, they face up to it. sounds like hyperbole, but that’s the truth: they face up to it. we are a great nation. my fellow americans, in life, there’s truth and, tragically, there are lies—lies conceived and spread for profit and power. we must be absolutely clear about what is true and what is a lie. and here is the truth: the former president of the united states of america has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election. he’s done so because he values power over principle, because he sees his own interests as more important than his country’s interests and america’s interests, and because his bruised ego matters more to him than our democracy or our constitution. he can’t accept he lost, even though that’s what 93 united states senators, his own attorney general, his own vice president, governors and state officials in every battleground state have all said: he lost. that’s what 81 million of you did as you voted for a new way forward. he has done what no president in american history—the history of this country—has ever, ever done: he refused to accept the results of an election and the will of the american people. while some courageous men and women in the republican party are standing against it, trying to uphold the principles of that party, too many others are transforming that party into something else. they seem no longer to want to be the party—the party of lincoln, eisenhower, reagan, the bushes. but whatever my other disagreements are with republicans who support the rule of law and not the rule of a single man, i will always seek to work together with them to find shared solutions where possible. because if we have a shared belief in democracy, then anything is possible—anything. and so, at this moment, we must decide: what kind of nation are we going to be? are we going to be a nation that accepts political violence as a norm? are we going to be a nation where we allow partisan election officials to overturn the legally expressed will of the people? are we going to be a nation that lives not by the light of the truth but in the shadow of lies? we cannot allow ourselves to be that kind of nation. the way forward is to recognize the truth and to live by it. the big lie being told by the former president and many republicans who fear his wrath is that the insurrection in this country actually took place on election day—november 3rd, 2020. think about that. is that what you thought? is that what you thought when you voted that day? taking part in an insurrection? is that what you thought you were doing? or did you think you were carrying out your highest duty as a citizen and voting? the former president and his supporters are trying to rewrite history. they want you to see election day as the day of insurrection and the riot that took place here on january 6th as the true expression of the will of the people. can you think of a more twisted way to look at this country—to look at america? i cannot. here’s the truth: the election of 2020 was the greatest demonstration of democracy in the history of this country. more of you voted in that election than have ever voted in all of american history. over 150 million americans went to the polls and voted that day in a pandemic—some at grea-—great risk to their lives. they should be applauded, not attacked. right now, in state after state, new laws are being written—not to protect the vote, but to deny it; not only to suppress the vote, but to subvert it; not to strengthen or protect our democracy, but because the former president lost. instead of looking at the election results from 2020 and saying they need new ideas or better ideas to win more votes, the former president and his supporters have decided the only way for them to win is to suppress your vote and subvert our elections. it’s wrong. it’s undemocratic. and frankly, it’s un-american. the second big lie being told by the former president and his supporters is that the results of the election of 2020 can’t be trusted. the truth is that no election—no election in american history has been more closely scrutinized or more carefully counted. every legal challenge questioning the results in every court in this country that could have been made was made and was rejected—often rejected by republican-appointed judges, including judges appointed by the former president himself, from state courts to the united states supreme court. recounts were undertaken in state after state. georgia—georgia counted its results three times, with one recount by hand. phony partisan audits were undertaken long after the election in several states. none changed the results. and in some of them, the irony is the margin of victory actually grew slightly. so, let’s speak plainly about what happened in 2020. even before the first ballot was cast, the former president was preemptively sowing doubt about the election results. he built his lie over months. it wasn’t based on any facts. he was just looking for an excuse—a pretext—to cover for the truth. he’s not just a former president. he’s a defeated former president—defeated by a margin of over 7 million of your votes in a full and free and fair election. there is simply zero proof the election results were inaccurate. in fact, in every venue where evidence had to be produced and an oath to tell the truth had to be taken, the former president failed to make his case. just think about this: the former president and his supporters have never been able to explain how they accept as accurate the other election results that took place on november 3rd—the elections for governor, united states senate, the house of representatives—elections in which they closed the gap in the house. they challenge none of that. the president’s name was first, then we went down the line—governors, senators, house of representatives. somehow, those results were accurate on the same ballot, but the presidential race was flawed? and on the same ballot, the same day, cast by the same voters. the only difference: the former president didn’t lose those races; he just lost the one that was his own. finally, the third big lie being told by a former president and his supporters is that the mob who sought to impose their will through violence are the nation’s true patriots. is that what you thought when you looked at the mob ransacking the capitol, destroying property, literally defecating in the hallways, rifling through desks of senators and representatives, hunting down members of congress? patriots? not in my view. to me, the true patriots were the more than 150 [million] americans who peacefully expressed their vote at the ballot box, the election workers who protected the integrity of the vote, and the heroes who defended this capitol. you can’t love your country only when you win. you can’t obey the law only when it’s convenient. you can’t be patriotic when you embrace and enable lies. those who stormed this capitol and those who instigated and incited and those who called on them to do so held a dagger at the throat of america—at american democracy. they didn’t come here out of patriotism or principle. they came here in rage—not in service of america, but rather in service of one man. those who incited the mob—the real plotters—who were desperate to deny the certification of the election and defy the will of the voters. but their plot was foiled. congressmen—democrats and republicans—stayed. senators, representatives, staff—they finished their work the constitution demanded. they honored their oath to defend the constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic. look, folks, now it’s up to all of us—to “we the people”—to stand for the rule of law, to preserve the flame of democracy, to keep the promise of america alive. that promise is at risk, targeted by the forces that value brute strength over the sanctity of democracy, fear over hope, personal gain over public good. make no mistake about it: we’re living at an inflection point in history. both at home and abroad, we’re engaged anew in a struggle between democracy and autocracy, between the aspirations of the many and the greed of the few, between the people’s right of self-determination and self-—the self-seeking autocrat. from china to russia and beyond, they’re betting that democracy’s days are numbered. they’ve actually told me democracy is too slow, too bogged down by division to succeed in today’s rapidly changing, complicated world. and they’re betting—they’re betting america will become more like them and less like us. they’re betting that america is a place for the autocrat, the dictator, the strongman. i do not believe that. that is not who we are. that is not who we have ever been. and that is not who we should ever, ever be. our founding fathers, as imperfect as they were, set in motion an experiment that changed the world—literally changed the world. here in america, the people would rule, power would be transferred peacefully—never at the tip of a spear or the barrel of a gun. and they committed to paper an idea that couldn’t live up to—they couldn’t live up to but an idea that couldn’t be constrained: yes, in america all people are created equal. we reject the view that if you succeed, i fail; if you get ahead, i fall behind; if i hold you down, i somehow lift myself up. the former president, who lies about this election, and the mob that attacked this capitol could not be further away from the core american values. they want to rule or they will ruin—ruin what our country fought for at lexington and concord; at gettysburg; at omaha beach; seneca falls; selma, alabama. what—and what we were fighting for: the right to vote, the right to govern ourselves, the right to determine our own destiny. and with rights come responsibilities: the responsibility to see each other as neighbors—maybe we disagree with that neighbor, but they’re not an adversary; the responsibility to accept defeat then get back in the arena and try again the next time to make your case; the responsibility to see that america is an idea—an idea that requires vigilant stewardship. as we stand here today—one year since january 6th, 2021—the lies that drove the anger and madness we saw in this place, they have not abated. so, we have to be firm, resolute, and unyielding in our defense of the right to vote and to have that vote counted. some have already made the ultimate sacrifice in this sacred effort. jill and i have mourned police officers in this capitol rotunda not once but twice in the wake of january 6th: once to honor officer brian sicknick, who lost his life the day after the attack, and a second time to honor officer billy evans, who lost his life defending this capitol as well. we think about the others who lost their lives and were injured and everyone living with the trauma of that day—from those defending this capitol to members of congress in both parties and their staffs, to reporters, cafeteria workers, custodial workers, and their families. don’t kid yourself: the pain and scars from that day run deep. i said it many times and it’s no more true or real than when we think about the events of january 6th: we are in a battle for the soul of america. a battle that, by the grace of god and the goodness and gracious—and greatness of this nation, we will win. believe me, i know how difficult democracy is. and i’m crystal clear about the threats america faces. but i also know that our darkest days can lead to light and hope. from the death and destruction, as the vice president referenced, in pearl harbor came the triumph over the forces of fascism. from the brutality of bloody sunday on the edmund pettus bridge came historic voting rights legislation. so, now let us step up, write the next chapter in american history where january 6th marks not the end of democracy, but the beginning of a renaissance of liberty and fair play. i did not seek this fight brought to this capitol one year ago today, but i will not shrink from it either. i will stand in this breach. i will defend this nation. and i will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of our democracy. we will make sure the will of the people is heard; that the ballot prevails, not violence; that authority in this nation will always be peacefully transferred. i believe the power of the presidency and the purpose is to unite this nation, not divide it; to lift us up, not tear us apart; to be about us—about us, not about “me.” deep in the heart of america burns a flame lit almost 250 years ago—of liberty, freedom, and equality. this is not a land of kings or dictators or autocrats. we’re a nation of laws; of order, not chaos; of peace, not violence. here in america, the people rule through the ballot, and their will prevails. so, let us remember: together, we’re one nation, under god, indivisible; that today, tomorrow, and forever, at our best, we are the united states of america. god bless you all. may god protect our troops. and may god bless those who stand watch over our democracy. speaker johnson, vice president vance, the first lady of the united states, members of the united states congress, thank you very much. and to my fellow citizens, america is back. six weeks ago, i stood beneath the dome of this capitol and proclaimed the dawn of the golden age of america. from that moment on, it has been nothing but swift and unrelenting action to usher in the greatest and most successful era in the history of our country.we have accomplished more in 43 days than most administrations accomplished in four years or eight years, and we are just getting started. thank you.i return to this chamber tonight to report that america’s momentum is back, our spirit is back, our pride is back, our confidence is back, and the american dream is surging bigger and better than ever before. the american dream is unstoppable, and our country is on the verge of a comeback, the likes of which the world has never witnessed and perhaps will never witness again. there’s never been anything like it.the presidential election of november 5th was a mandate like has not been seen in many decades. we won all seven swing states, giving us an electoral college victory of 312 votes. we won the popular vote —representative green: (inaudible.)the president: — by big numbers and won counties in our country —audience: booo —audience: usa! usa! usa!representative green: you are — you have no right to cut medicaid.audience: usa! usa! usa!the president: — and won counties in our country 2,700 to 525 on a map that reads almost completely red for republican.now, for the first time in modern history, more americans believe that our country is headed in the right direction than the wrong direction. in fact, it’s an astonishing record: 27-point swing, the most ever.likewise, small-business optimism saw its single largest one-month gain ever recorded.speaker johnson: mr. president —the president: a 41-point jump.(speaker johnson strikes the gavel.)speaker johnson: members are directed to uphold and maintain decorum in the house and to cease any further disruptions. that’s your warning.representative green: he has no mandate to cut medicaid.speaker johnson: members are engaging in willful and continuing breach of decorum, and the chair is prepared to direct the sergeant at arms to restore order to the joint session.mr. green, take your seat. take your seat, sir.representative green: he has no mandate to cut medicaid.speaker johnson: take your seat.finding that members continue to engage in willful and concerted disruption of proper decorum, the chair now directs the sergeant at arms to restore order. remove this gentleman from the chamber.representative green: shame on all of you.(members of the audience sing “na na hey hey kiss him goodbye.”)(cross-talk.)representative green: you have no mandate.speaker johnson: members are directed to uphold and maintain decorum in the house.mr. president, you can continue.the president: thank you.over the past six weeks, i have signed nearly 100 executive orders and taken more than 400 executive actions — a record — to restore common sense, safety, optimism, and wealth all across our wonderful land. the people elected me to do the job, and i’m doing it.in fact, it has been stated by many that the first month of our presidency — it’s our presidency — is the most successful in the history of our nation by many. and what makes it even more impressive is that — do you know who number two is? george washington. how about that? how about that? i don’t know about that list, but we’ll take it.within hours of taking the oath of office, i declared a national emergency on our southern border and i deployed the u.s. military and border patrol to repel the invasion of our country. and what a job they’ve done.as a result, illegal border crossings last month were, by far, the lowest ever recorded. ever. they heard my words, and they chose not to come. much easier that way.in comparison, under joe biden, the worst president in american history — there were hundreds of thousands of illegal crossings a month, and virtually all of them, including murderers, drug dealers, gang members, and people from mental institutions and insane asylums, were released into our country. who would want to do that?this is my fifth such speech to congress, and, once again, i look at the democrats in front of me, and i realize there is absolutely nothing i can say to make them happy or to make them stand or smile or applaud. nothing i can do. i could find a cure to the most devastating disease — a disease that would wipe out entire nations, or announce the answers to the greatest economy in history or the stoppage of crime to the lowest levels ever recorded, and these people sitting right here will not clap, will not stand, and certainly will not cheer for these astronomical achievements. they won’t do it no matter what.five times i’ve been up here. it’s very sad, and it just shouldn’t be this way.so, democrats sitting before me, for just this one night, why not join us in celebrating so many incredible wins for america? for the good of our nation, let’s work together and let’s truly make america great again.every day, my administration is fighting to deliver the change america needs, to bring a future that america deserves, and we’re doing it. this is a time for big dreams and bold action.upon taking office, i imposed an immediate freeze on all federal hiring, a freeze on all new federal regulations, and a freeze on all foreign aid. i terminated the ridiculous green new scam. i withdrew from the unfair paris climate accord, which was costing us trillions of dollars that other countries were not paying. i withdrew from the corrupt world health organization. and i also withdrew from the anti-american u.n. human rights council.we ended all of biden’s environmental restrictions that were making our country far less safe and totally unaffordable. and importantly, we ended the last administration’s insane electric vehicle mandate, saving our autoworkers and companies from economic destruction.to unshackle our economy, i have directed that for every 1 new regulation, 10 old regulations must be eliminated, just like i did in my very successful first term. and in that first term, we set records on ending unnecessary rules and regulations like no other president had done before.we ordered all federal workers to return to the office. they will either show up for work in person or be removed from their job.and we have ended weaponized government, where, as an example, a sitting president is allowed to viciously prosecute his political opponent, like me. how did that work out? not too good. not too good.and i have stopped all government censorship and brought back free speech in america. it’s back.and two days ago, i signed an order making english the official language of the united states of america. i renamed the gulf of mexico the gulf of america.and, likewise, i renamed — for a great president, william mckinley — mount mckinley again. beautiful alaska. we love alaska.we’ve ended the tyranny of so-called diversity, equity, and inclusion policies all across the entire federal government and, indeed, the private sector and our military. and our country will be woke no longer.we believe that whether you are a doctor, an accountant, a lawyer, or an air traffic controller, you should be hired and promoted based on skill and competence, not race or gender. very important. you should be hired based on merit. and the supreme court, in a brave and very powerful decision, has allowed us to do so.thank you. thank you very much. thank you.we have removed the poison of critical race theory from our public schools. and i signed an order making it the official policy of the united states government that there are only two genders: male and female.i also signed an executive order to ban men from playing in women’s sports.three years ago, payton mcnabb was an all-star high school athlete — one of the best — preparing for a future in college sports. but when her girls’ volleyball match was invaded by a male, he smashed the ball so hard in payton’s face, causing traumatic brain injury, partially paralyzing her right side, and ending her athletic career. it was a shot like she’s never seen before. she’s never seen anything like it.payton is here tonight in the gallery. and, payton, from now on, schools will kick the men off the girls’ team or they will lose all federal funding.and if you really want to see numbers, just take a look at what happened in the woman’s boxing, weightlifting, track and field, swimming, or cycling, where a male recently finished a long-distance race five hours and 14 minutes ahead of a woman for a new record by five hours. broke the record by five hours.it’s demeaning for women, and it’s very bad for our country. we’re not going to put up with it any longer.what i have just described is only a small fraction of the commonsense revolution that is now, because of us, sweeping the entire world. common sense has become a common theme, and we will never go back. never. never going to let that happen.among my very highest priorities is to rescue our economy and get dramatic and immediate relief to working families. as you know, we inherited from the last administration an economic catastrophe and an inflation nightmare. their policies drove up energy prices, pushed up grocery costs, and drove the necessities of life out of reach for millions and millions of americans. they’ve never had anything like it.we suffered the worst inflation in 48 years but perhaps even in the history of our country. they’re not sure. as president, i’m fighting every day to reverse this damage and make america affordable again.joe biden especially let the price of eggs get out of control. the egg price is out of control, and we’re working hard to get it back down.secretary, do a good job on that. you inherited a total mess from the previous administration. do a good job.a major focus of our fight to defeat inflation is rapidly reducing the cost of energy. the previous administration cut the number of new oil and gas leases by 95 percent, slowed pipeline construction to a halt, and closed more than 100 power plants. we are opening up many of those power plants right now.and, frankly, we have never seen anything like it. that’s why, on my first day in office, i declared a national energy emergency. as you’ve heard me say many times, we have more liquid gold under our feet than any nation on earth and by far. and now i’ve fully authorized the most talented team ever assembled to go and get it. it’s called drill, baby, drill.my administration is also working on a gigantic natural gas pipeline in alaska — among the largest in the world — where japan, south korea, and other nations want to be our partner with investments of trillions of dollars each. there’s never been anything like that one. it will be truly spectacular. it’s all set to go. the permitting is gotten.and later this week, i will also take historic action to dramatically expand production of critical minerals and rare earths here in the usa.to further combat inflation, we will not only be reducing the cost of energy, but we’ll be ending the flagrant waste of taxpayer dollars. and to that end, i have created the brand-new department of government efficiency – doge. perhaps you’ve heard of it — perhaps — which is headed by elon musk, who is in the gallery tonight.thank you, elon. he’s working very hard. he didn’t need this. he didn’t need this. thank you very much. we appreciate it. everybody here, even this side, appreciates it, i believe. they just don’t want to admit that.just listen to some of the appalling waste we have already identified.$22 billion from hhs to provide free housing and cars for illegal aliens.$45 million for diversity, equity, and inclusion scholarships in burma.$40 million to improve the social and economic inclusion of sedentary migrants. nobody knows what that is.$8 million to promote lgbtqi+ in the african nation of lesotho, which nobody has ever heard of.$60 million for indigenous peoples and afro-colombian empowerment in central america. $60 million.$8 million for making mice transgender. this is real.$32 million for a left-wing propaganda operation in moldova.$10 million for male circumcision in mozambique.$20 million for the arab “sesame street” in the middle east. it’s a program. $20 million for a program.$1.9 billion to recently created decarbonization of homes committee, headed up — and we know she’s involved — just at the last moment, the money was passed over — by a woman named stacey abrams. have you ever heard of her?a $3.5 million consulting contract for lavish fish monitoring.$1.5 million for voter confidence in liberia.$14 million for social cohesion in mali.$59 million for illegal alien hotel rooms in new york city.he’s a real estate developer. he’s done very well.$250,000 to increase vegan local climate action innovation in zambia.$42 million for social and behavior change in uganda.$14 million for improving public procurement in serbia.$47 million for improving learning outcomes in asia. asia is doing very well with learning. don’t know what we’re doing. we should use it ourselves.and $101 million for dei contracts at the department of education, the most ever paid. nothing even like it.under the trump administration, all of these scams — and there are far worse, but i didn’t think it was appropriate to talk about them. they’re so bad. many more have been found out and exposed and swiftly terminated by a group of very intelligent, mostly young people, headed up by elon. and we appreciate it. we’ve found hundreds of billions of dollars of fraud.and we’ve taken back the money and reduced our debt to fight inflation and other things. taken back a lot of that money. we got it just in time.this is just the beginning. the government accountability office, a federal government office, has estimated annual fraud of over $500 billion in our nation, and we are working very hard to stop it. we’re going to.we’re also identifying shocking levels of incompetence and probable fraud in the social security program for our seniors and that our seniors and people that we love rely on. believe it or not, government databases list 4.7 million social security members from people aged 100 to 109 years old.it lists 3.6 million people from ages 110 to 119. i don’t know any of them. i know some people that are rather elderly, but not quite that elderly.3.47 million people from ages 120 to 129.3.9 million people from ages 130 to 139.3.5 million people from ages 140 to 149.and money is being paid to many of them, and we’re searching right now.in fact, pam, good luck. good luck. you’re going to find it.but a lot of money is paid out to people because it just keeps getting paid and paid, and nobody does — and it really hurts social security and hurts our country.1.3 million people from ages 150 to 159. and over 130,000 people, according to the social security databases, are age over 160 years old.we have a healthier country than i thought, bobby.including, to finish, 1,039 people between the ages of 220 and 229; one person between the age of 240 and 249; and one person is listed at 360 years of age.more than 100 years older than our country.but we’re going to find out where that money is going, and it’s not going to be pretty.by slashing all of the fraud, waste, and theft we can find, we will defeat inflation, bring down mortgage rates, lower car payments and grocery prices, protect our seniors, and put more money in the pockets of american families.and today, interest rates took a beautiful drop — big, beautiful drop. it’s about time.and in the near future, i want to do what has not been done in 24 years: balance the federal budget. we’re going to balance it.with that goal in mind, we have developed in great detail what we are calling the gold card, which goes on sale very, very soon.for $5 million, we will allow the most successful, job-creating people from all over the world to buy a path to u.s. citizenship. it’s like the green card but better and more sophisticated. and these people will have to pay tax in our country. they won’t have to pay tax from where they came. the money that they’ve made, you wouldn’t want to do that, but they have to pay tax, create jobs.they’ll also be taking people out of colleges and paying for them so that we can keep them in our country, instead of having them being forced out. number one at the top school, as an example, being forced out and not being allowed to stay and create tremendous numbers of jobs and great success for a company out there.so, while we take out the criminals, killers, traffickers, and child predators who were allowed to enter our country under the open border policy of these people — the democrats, the biden administration — the open border, insane policies that you’ve allowed to destroy our country — we will now bring in brilliant, hardworking, job-creating people. they’re going to pay a lot of money, and we’re going to reduce our debt with that money.americans have given us a mandate for bold and profound change. for nearly 100 years, the federal bureaucracy has grown until it has crushed our freedoms, ballooned our deficits, and held back america’s potential in every possible way. the nation founded by pioneers and risk-takers now drowns under millions and millions of pages of regulations and debt.approvals that should take 10 days to get instead take 10 years, 15 years, and even 20 years before you’re rejected. meanwhile, we have hundreds of thousands of federal workers who have not been showing up to work.my administration will reclaim power from this unaccountable bureaucracy, and we will restore true democracy to america again. any federal bureaucrat who resists this change will be removed from office immediately because we are draining the swamp. it’s very simple. and the days of rule by unelected bureaucrats are over.and the next phase of our plan to deliver the greatest economy in history is for this congress to pass tax cuts for everybody. they’re in there. they’re waiting for you to vote.and i’m sure that the people on my right — i don’t mean the republican right, but my right right here — i’m sure you’re going to vote for those tax cuts, because, otherwise, i don’t believe the people will ever vote you into office. so, i’m doing you a big favor by telling you that.but i know this group is going to be voting for the taxes.thank you. it’s a very, very big part of our plan. we had tremendous success in our first term with it. a very big part of our plan. we’re seeking permanent income tax cuts all across the board.and to get urgently needed relief to americans hit especially hard by inflation, i’m calling for no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on social security benefits for our great seniors.(addressing speaker johnson.) good luck.and i also want to make interest payments on car loans tax deductible but only if the car is made in america.and, by the way, we’re going to have growth in the auto industry like nobody has ever seen. plants are opening up all over the place. deals are being made. never seen. that’s a combination of the election win and tariffs.it’s a beautiful word, isn’t it?that, along with our other policies, will allow our auto industry to absolutely boom. it’s going to boom. spoke to the majors today — all three — the top people, and they’re so excited. in fact, already, numerous car companies have announced that they will be building massive automobile plants in america, with honda just announcing a new plant in indiana, one of the largest anywhere in the world.and this has taken place since our great victory on november 5th, a date which will hopefully go down as one of the most important in the history of our country.in addition, as part of our tax cuts, we want to cut taxes on domestic production and all manufacturing. and just as we did before, we will provide 100 percent expensing. it will be retroactive to january 20th, 2025, and it was one of the main reasons why our tax cuts were so successful in our first term, giving us the most successful economy in the history of our country. first term — we had a great first term.if you don’t make your product in america, however, under the trump administration, you will pay a tariff and, in some cases, a rather large one. other countries have used tariffs against us for decades, and now it’s our turn to start using them against those other countries.on average, the european union, china, brazil, india, mexico, and canada — have you heard of them? — and countless other nations charge us tremendously higher tariffs than we charge them. it’s very unfair. india charges us auto tariffs higher than 100 percent. china’s average tariff on our products is twice what we charge them. and south korea’s average tariff is four times higher. think of that: four times higher. and we give so much help militarily and in so many other ways to south korea, but that’s what happens.this is happening by friend and foe. this system is not fair to the united states and never was. and so, on april 2nd — i wanted to make it april 1st, but i didn’t want to be accused of april fool’s day. just one day, which cost us a lot of money. but we’re going to do it in april. i’m a very superstitious person. april 2nd, reciprocal tariffs kick in. and whatever they tariff us — other countries — we will tariff them. that’s reciprocal, back and forth. whatever they tax us, we will tax them.if they do non-monetary tariffs to keep us out of their market, then we will do non-monetary barriers to keep them out of our market. there’s a lot of that too. they don’t even allow us in their market.we will take in trillions and trillions of dollars and create jobs like we have never seen before. i did it with china, and i did it with others. and the biden administration couldn’t do anything about it because it was so much money. they couldn’t do anything about it.we have been ripped off for decades by nearly every country on earth, and we will not let that happen any longer.much has been said over the last three months about mexico and canada, but we have very large deficits with both of them. but even more importantly, they have allowed fentanyl to come into our country at levels never seen before, killing hundreds of thousands of our citizens and many very young, beautiful people — destroying families. nobody has ever seen anything like it.they are, in effect, receiving subsidies of hundreds of billions of dollars. we pay subsidies to canada and to mexico of hundreds of billions of dollars. and the united states will not be doing that any longer. we’re not going to do it any longer.thanks to our america first policies we’re putting into place, we have had $1.7 trillion of new investment in america in just the past few weeks. the combination of the election and our economic policies — the people of softbank, one of the most brilliant anywhere in the world, announced a $200 billion investment. openai and oracle — larry ellison — announced $500 billion investment, which they wouldn’t have done if kamala had won.apple announced $500 billion investment. tim cook called me. he said, “i cannot spend it fast enough.” it’s going to be much higher than that, i believe. they’ll be building their plants here, instead of in china.and just yesterday, taiwan semiconductor — the biggest in the world, most powerful in the world, has a tremendous amount — 97 percent of the market, announced a $165 billion investment to build the most powerful chips on earth right here in the usa.and we’re not giving them any money. your chips act is a horrible, horrible thing. we give hundreds of billions of dollars, and it doesn’t mean a thing. they take our money, and they don’t spend it. all that meant to them — we’re giving them no money. all that was important to them was they didn’t want to pay the tariffs, so they came and they’re building. and many other companies are coming.we don’t have to give them money. we just want to protect our businesses and our people. and they will come because they won’t have to pay tariffs if they build in america. and so, it’s very amazing.you should get rid of the chip act. and whatever is left over, mr. speaker, you should use it to reduce debt or any other reason you want to.our new trade policy will also be great for the american farmer — i love the farmer — who will now be selling into our home market, the usa, because nobody is going to be able to compete with you. because those goods that come in from other countries and companies, they’re really, really in a bad position in so many different ways. they’re uninspected. they may be very dirty and disgusting, and they come in and they pour in, and they hurt our american farmers.the tariffs will go on agricultural product coming into america. and our farmers, starting on april 2nd — it may be a little bit of an adjustment period. we had that before, when i made the deal with china. fifty billion dollars of purchases, and i said, “just bear with me,” and they did. they did. probably have to bear with me again, and this will be even better.that was great. the problem with it was that biden didn’t enforce it. he didn’t enforce it. fifty billion dollars of purchases, and we were doing great, but biden did not enforce it. and it hurt our farmers, but our farmers are going to have a field day right now.so, to our farmers, have a lot of fun. i love you too. i love you too. it’s all going to happen.and i have also imposed a 25 percent tariff on foreign aluminum, copper, lumber, and steel, because if we don’t have, as an example, steel and lots of other things, we don’t have a military and, frankly, we just won’t have a country very long.here today is a proud american steelworker, fantastic person from decatur, alabama. jeff denard has been working at the same steel plant for 27 years in a job that has allowed him to serve as the captain of his local volunteer fire department; raise seven children with his beautiful wife, nicole; and over the years, provide a loving home for more than 40 foster children. so great, jeff.thank you, jeff. thank you, jeff.stories like jeff’s remind us that tariffs are not just about protecting american jobs. they’re about protecting the soul of our country. tariffs are about making america rich again and making america great again. and it’s happening, and it will happen rather quickly.there will be a little disturbance, but we’re okay with that. it won’t be much.no, you’re not. oh.and look — and look where biden took us. very low. the lowest we’ve ever been.jeff, i want to thank you very much.and i also want to recognize another person who has devoted herself to foster care community. she worked so hard on it. a very loving person. our magnificent first lady of the united states.melania’s work has yielded incredible results, helping prepare our nation’s future leaders as they enter the workforce.our first lady is joined by two impressive young women — very impressive: haley ferguson, who benefited from the first lady’s fostering the future initiative and is poised to complete her education and become a teacher, and elliston berry, who became a victim of an illicit deepfake image produced by a peer. with elliston’s help, the senate just passed the take it down act —this is so important. thank you very much, john. john thune, thank you. stand up, john. thank you, john. thank you all very much. thank you.and thank you to john thune and the senate. a great job.— to criminalize the publication of such images online. this terrible, terrible thing. and once it passes the house, i look forward to signing that bill into law. thank you.and i’m going to use that bill for myself too, if you don’t mind because nobody gets treated worse than i do online. nobody.that’s great. thank you very much to the senate. thank you.but if we truly care about protecting america’s children, no step is more crucial than securing america’s borders. over the past four years, 21 million people poured into the united states. many of them were murderers, human traffickers, gang members, and other criminals from the streets of dangerous cities all throughout the world. because of joe biden’s insane and very dangerous open border policies, they are now strongly embedded in our country, but we are getting them out and getting them out fast.and i want to thank tom homan. and, kristi, i want to thank you. and paul of border patrol, i want to thank you. what a job they’ve all done. everybody. border patrol, ice. law enforcement, in general, is incredible. we have to take care of our law enforcement. we have to.last year, a brilliant 22-year-old nursing student named laken riley — the best in her class, admired by everybody — went out for a jog on the campus of the university of georgia. that morning, laken was viciously attacked, assaulted, beaten, brutalized, and horrifically murdered. laken was stolen from us by a savage illegal alien gang member who was arrested while trespassing across biden’s open southern border and then set loose into the united states under the heartless policies of that failed administration. it was indeed a failed administration.he had then been arrested and released in a democrat-run sanctuary city — a disaster — before ending the life of this beautiful young angel.with us this evening are laken’s beloved mother, allyson, and her sister, lauren.last year, i told laken’s grieving parents that we would ensure their daughter would not have died in vain. that’s why the very first bill i signed into law as your 47th president mandates the detention of all dangerous criminal aliens who threaten public safety. it’s a very strong, powerful act. it’s called the laken riley act.so, allyson and lauren, america will never, ever forget our beautiful laken hope riley.thank you very much.since taking office, my administration has launched the most sweeping border and immigration crackdown in american history, and we quickly achieved the lowest numbers of illegal border crossers ever recorded. thank you.the media and our friends in the democrat party kept saying we needed new legislation. “we must have legislation to secure the border.” but it turned out that all we really needed was a new president.thank you.joe biden didn’t just open our borders. he flew illegal aliens over them to overwhelm our schools, hospitals, and communities throughout the country. entire towns, like aurora, colorado, and springfield, ohio, buckled under the weight of the migrant occupation and corruption like nobody has ever seen before. beautiful towns destroyed.now, just as i promised in my inaugural address, we are achieving the great liberation of america.but there still is much work to be done.here tonight is a woman i have gotten to know: alexis nungaray from houston. wonderful woman. last june, alexis’s 12-year-old daughter, her precious jocelyn, walked to a nearby convenience store. she was kidnapped, tied up, assaulted for two hours under a bridge, and horrifically murdered. arrested and charged with this heinous crime are two illegal alien monsters from venezuela, released into america by the last administration through their ridiculous open border.the death of this beautiful 12-year-old girl and the agony of her mother and family touched our entire nation greatly.alexis, i promised that we would always remember your daughter — your magnificent daughter. and earlier tonight, i signed an order keeping my word to you.one thing i have learned about jocelyn is that she loved animals so much. she loved nature. across galveston bay from where jocelyn lived in houston, you will find a magnificent national wildlife refuge. a pristine, peaceful, 34,000-acre sanctuary for all of god’s creatures on the edge of the gulf of america.alexis, moments ago, i formally renamed that refuge in loving memory of your beautiful daughter, jocelyn.so, mr. vice president, if you would, may i have the order?(the president holds up the executive order.)thank you very much.all three savages charged with jocelyn and laken’s murders were members of the venezuelan prison gang — the toughest gang, they say, in the world — known as tren de aragua. two weeks ago, i officially designated this gang, along with ms-13 and the bloodthirsty mexican drug cartels, as foreign terrorist organizations. they are now officially in the same category as isis, and that’s not good for them.countless thousands of these terrorists were welcomed into the u.s. by the biden administration, but now every last one will be rounded up and forcibly removed from our country, or, if they’re too dangerous, put in jails, standing trial in this country, because we don’t want them to come back ever.with us this evening is a warrior on the front lines of that battle, border patrol agent roberto ortiz. great guy.in january, roberto and another agent were patrolling by the rio grande, near an area known as cartel island — doesn’t sound too nice to me — when heavily armed gunmen started shooting at them. roberto saw that his partner was totally exposed, in great danger, and he leapt into action, returning fire and providing crucial seconds for his fellow agent to seek safety, and just barely. i have some of the prints of that event, and it was not good.agent ortiz, we salute you for your great courage and for your line of fire that you took and for the bravery that you showed. we honor you, and we will always honor you. thank you, roberto, very much. thank you, roberto.and i actually got to know him on my many calls to the border. he’s a great, great gentleman.the territory to the immediate south of our border is now dominated entirely by criminal cartels that murder, rape, torture, and exercise total control — they have total control over a whole nation — posing a grave threat to our national security. the cartels are waging war in america, and it’s time for america to wage war on the cartels, which we are doing.five nights ago, mexican authorities, because of our tariff policies being imposed on them — think of this — handed over to us 29 of the biggest cartel leaders in their country. that has never happened before. hey want to make us happy. first time ever.but we need mexico and canada to do much more than they’ve done, and they have to stop the fentanyl and drugs pouring into the usa. they’re going to stop it.i have sent congress a detailed funding request laying out exactly how we will eliminate these threats to protect our homeland and complete the largest deportation operation in american history, larger even than current record holder, president dwight d. eisenhower, a moderate man but someone who believed very strongly in borders. americans expect congress to send me this funding without delay so i can sign it into law.so, mr. speaker, john thune, both of you, i hope you’re going to be able to do that. mr. speaker, thank you. mr. leader, thank you. thank you very much. and let’s get it to me. i’ll sign it so fast, you won’t even believe it.and as we reclaim our sovereignty, we must also bring back law and order to our cities and towns. in recent years, our justice system has been turned upside down by radical-left lunatics. many jurisdictions virtually ceased enforcing the law against dangerous repeat offenders while weaponizing law enforcement against political opponents like me.my administration has acted swiftly and decisively to restore fair, equal, and impartial justice under the constitutional rule of law, starting at the fbi and the doj.pam, good luck. kash, wherever you may be, good luck. good luck. pam bondi, good luck. so important. going to do a great job.kash, thank you. thank you, kash.they have already started very strong. they’re going to do a fantastic job. you’re going to be very proud of them.we’re also, once again, giving our police officers the support, protection, and respect they so dearly deserve. they have to get it. they have such a hard, dangerous job, but we’re going to make it less dangerous. the problem is the bad guys don’t respect the law, but they’re starting to respect it, and they soon will respect it.this also includes our great fire departments throughout the country. our firemen and women are unbelievable people, and i will never forget them. and besides that, they voted for me in record numbers, so i have no choice.one year ago this month, 31-year-old new york police officer jonathan diller — unbelievably wonderful person and a great officer — was gunned down at a traffic stop on long island. i went to his funeral. the vicious criminal charged with his murder had 21 prior arrests, and they were rough arrests too. he was a real bad one.the thug in the seat next to him had 14 prior arrests and went by the name of “killer.” he was killer. he killed other people. they say a lot of them.i attended officer diller’s service, and when i met his wife and one-year-old son, ryan, it was very inspirational, actually. his widow’s name is stephanie, and she is here tonight. stephanie, thank you very much, stephanie. thank you very much.stephanie, we’re going to make sure that ryan knows his dad was a true hero — new york’s finest. and we’re going to get these cold-blooded killers and repeat offenders off our streets, and we’re going to do it fast. got to stop it.they get out with 28 arrests. they push people into subway trains. they hit people over the back of the head with baseball bats. we got to get them out of here.i’ve already signed an executive order requiring a mandatory death penalty for anyone who murders a police officer. and, tonight, i’m asking congress to pass that policy into permanent law.i’m also asking for a new crime bill, getting tough on repeat offenders while enhancing protections for america’s police officers so they can do their jobs without fear of their lives being totally destroyed. they don’t want to be killed. we’re not going to let them be killed.joining us in the gallery tonight is a young man who truly loves our police. his name is d.j. daniel. he is 13 years old, and he has always dreamed of becoming a police officer.but in 2018, d.j. was diagnosed with brain cancer. the doctors gave him five months at most to live. that was more than six years ago.since that time, d.j. and his dad have been on a quest to make his dream come true, and d.j. has been sworn in as an honorary law enforcement officer, actually, a number of times. the police love him. the police departments love him.and tonight, d.j., we’re going to do you the biggest honor of them all. i am asking our new secret service director, sean curran, to officially make you an agent of the united states secret service.(director curran presents mr. daniel with a secret service agent credential.)audience: d.j.! d.j.! d.j.!the president: thank you, d.j.d.j.’s doctors believe his cancer likely came from a chemical he was exposed to when he was younger. since 1975, rates of child cancer have increased by more than 40 percent. reversing this trend is one of the top priorities for our new presidential commission to make america healthy again, chaired by our new secretary of health and human services, robert f. kennedy, jr.with the name “kennedy,” you would have thought everybody over here would have been cheering. how quickly they forget.our goal is to get toxins out of our environment, poisons out of our food supply, and keep our children healthy and strong.as an example, not long ago — you can’t even believe these numbers — 1 in 10,000 children had autism. 1 in 10,000. and now it’s 1 in 36. there’s something wrong. one in 36. think of that.so, we’re going to find out what it is, and there’s nobody better than bobby and all of the people that are working with you — you have the best — to figure out what is going on.okay, bobby? good luck. it’s a very important job. thank you. thank you. thank you.my administration is also working to protect our children from toxic ideologies in our schools.a few years ago, january littlejohn and her husband discovered that their daughter’s school had secretly socially transitioned their 13-year-old little girl. teachers and administrators conspired to deceive january and her husband, while encouraging her daughter to use a new name and pronouns — “they/them” pronouns, actually — all without telling january, who is here tonight and is now a courageous advocate against this form of child abuse. january, thank you. thank you. thank you very much. thank you. thank you.stories like this are why, shortly after taking office, i signed an executive order banning public schools from indoctrinating our children with transgender ideology.i also signed an order to cut off all taxpayer funding to any institution that engages in the sexual mutilation of our youth. and now i want congress to pass a bill permanently banning and criminalizing sex changes on children and forever ending the lie that any child is trapped in the wrong body. this is a big lie.and our message to every child in america is that you are perfect exactly the way god made you.because we’re getting wokeness out of our schools and out of our military, and it’s already out, and it’s out of our society. we don’t want it. wokeness is trouble. wokeness is bad. it’s gone. it’s gone. and we feel so much better for it, don’t we? don’t we feel better?our service members won’t be activists and ideologues. they will be fighters and warriors. they will fight for our country.and, pete, congratulations. secretary of defense, congratulations.and he’s not big into the woke movement, i can tell you. i know him well.i am pleased to report that, in january, the u.s. army had its single best recruiting month in 15 years and that all armed services are having among the best recruiting results ever in the history of our services. what a difference.and you know it was just a few months ago where the results were exactly the opposite. we couldn’t recruit anywhere. we couldn’t recruit. now we’re having the best results, just about, that we’ve ever had. what a tremendous turnaround. it’s really a beautiful thing to see. people love our country again. it’s very simple. they love our country, and they love being in our military again. so, it’s a great thing. and thank you very much. great job. thank you.we’re joined tonight by a young man, jason hartley, who knows the weight of that call of duty. jason’s father, grandfather, and great-grandfather all wore the uniform.jason tragically lost his dad, who was also a los angeles county sheriff’s deputy, when he was just a boy, and now he wants to carry on the family legacy of service. jason is a senior in high school, a six-letter varsity athlete — a really good athlete, they say — a brilliant student, with a 4.46 — and his greatest dream is to attend the u.s. military academy at west point.and, jason, that’s a very big deal getting in. that’s a hard one to get into. but i’m pleased to inform you that your application has been accepted. you will soon be joining the corps of cadets.thank you. jason, you’re going to be on the long gray line, jason.as commander in chief, my focus is on building the most powerful military of the future. as a first step, i’m asking congress to fund a state-of-the-art golden dome missile defense shield to protect our homeland, all made in the usa.and ronald reagan wanted to do it long ago, but the technology just wasn’t there, not even close. but now we have the technology. it’s incredible, actually. and other places, they have it: israel has it. other places have it. and the united states should have it too. right, tim? right? they should have it too. so, i want to thank you.but it’s a very important. this is a very dangerous world. we should have it. we want to be protected. and we’re going to protect our citizens like never before.to boost our defense industrial base, we are also going to resurrect the american shipbuilding industry, including commercial shipbuilding and military shipbuilding.and for that purpose, i am announcing tonight that we will create a new office of shipbuilding in the white house and offer special tax incentives to bring this industry home to america, where it belongs.we used to make so many ships. we don’t make them anymore very much, but we’re going to make them very fast, very soon. it will have a huge impact.to further enhance our national security, my administration will be reclaiming the panama canal, and we’ve already started doing it.just today, a large american company announced they are buying both ports around the panama canal and lots of other things having to do with the panama canal and a couple of other canals.the panama canal was built by americans for americans, not for others, but others could use it. but it was built at tremendous cost of american blood and treasure. thirty-eight thousand workers died building the panama canal. they died of malaria. they died of snake bites and mosquitoes. not a nice place to work. they paid them very highly to go there, knowing there was a 25 percent chance that they would die. the most expensive project, also, that was ever built in our country’s history, if you bring it up to modern-day costs.it was given away by the carter administration for $1, but that agreement has been violated very severely. we didn’t give it to china. we gave it to panama, and we’re taking it back.and we have marco rubio in charge. good luck, marco. now we know who to blame if anything goes wrong.no, marco has been amazing, and he’s going to do a great job. think of it. he got a hundred votes. you know, he was approved with, actually, 99, but the 100th was this gentleman, and i feel very certain — so, let’s assume he got 100 votes. and i’m either very, very happy about that or i’m very concerned about it.but he’s already proven — i mean, he’s a great gentleman. he’s respected by everybody. and we appreciate you voting for marco. he’s going to do a fantastic job. hank you. thank you. he’s doing a great job. great job.and i also have a message tonight for the incredible people of greenland. we strongly support your right to determine your own future, and, if you choose, we welcome you into the united states of america.we need greenland for national security and even international security, and we’re working with everybody involved to try and get it. but we need it, really, for international world security. and i think we’re going to get it. one way or the other, we’re going to get it.we will keep you safe. we will make you rich. and together, we will take greenland to heights like you have never thought possible before.it’s a very small population but very, very large piece of land and very, very important for military security.america is once again standing strong against the forces of radical islamic terrorism.three and a half years ago, isis terrorists killed 13 american service members and countless others in the abbey gate bombing during the disastrous and incompetent withdrawal from afghanistan — not that they were withdrawing; it was the way they withdrew. perhaps the most embarrassing moment in the history of our country.tonight, i am pleased to announce that we have just apprehended the top terrorist responsible for that atrocity, and he is right now on his way here to face the swift sword of american justice.and i want to thank, especially, the government of pakistan for helping arrest this monster.this was a very momentous day for those 13 families, who i actually got to know very well, most of them, whose children were murdered, and the many people that were so badly — over 42 people — so badly injured on that fateful day in afghanistan. what a horrible day. such incompetence was shown that when putin saw what happened, i guess he said, “wow, maybe this is my chance.” that’s how bad it was. should have never happened. grossly incompetent people.i spoke to many of the parents and loved ones, and they’re all in our hearts tonight. just spoke to them on the phone. we had a big call. every one of them called, and everybody was on the line, and they did nothing but cry with happiness. they were very happy — as happy as you can be under those circumstances. heir child, brother, sister, son, daughter was killed for no reason whatsoever.in the middle east, we’re bringing back our hostages from gaza. in my first term, we achieved one of the most groundbreaking peace agreements in generations: the abraham accords.and now we’re going to build on that foundation to create a more peaceful and prosperous future for the entire region. a lot of things are happening in the middle east. people haven’t been talking about that so much lately with everything going on with ukraine and russia, but a lot of things are happening in the middle east. it’s a rough neighborhood, actually.i’m also working tirelessly to end the savage conflict in ukraine. millions of ukrainians and russians have been needlessly killed or wounded in this horrific and brutal conflict with no end in sight.the united states has sent hundreds of billions of dollars to support ukraine’s defense with no security, with no anything.do you want to keep it going for another five years?senator warren: yes!the president: yeah. yeah, you would say — pocahontas says, “yes.”two thousand people are being killed every single week — more than that. they’re russian young people. they’re ukrainian young people. they’re not americans. but i want it to stop.meanwhile, europe has sadly spent more money buying russian oil and gas than they have spent on defending ukraine, by far. think of that. they’ve spent more buying russian oil and gas than they have defending. and we’ve spent, perhaps, $350 billion. like taking candy from a baby, that’s what happened. and they’ve spent $100 billion. what a difference that is. and we have an ocean separating us, and they don’t.but we’re getting along very well with them, and lots of good things are happening.biden has authorized more money in this fight than europe has spent by billions and billions of dollars. it’s hard to believe that they wouldn’t have stopped it and said, at some point, “come on. let’s equalize. you got to be equal to us.” but that didn’t happen.earlier today, i received an important letter from president zelenskyy of ukraine. the letter reads, “ukraine is ready to come to the negotiating table as soon as possible to bring lasting peace closer.” “nobody wants peace more than the ukrainians,” he said. “my team and i stand ready to work under president trump’s strong leadership to get a peace that lasts. we do really value how much america has done to help ukraine maintain its sovereignty and independence. regarding the agreement on minerals and security, ukraine is ready to sign it at any time that is convenient for you.”i appreciate that he sent this letter. just got it a little while ago.simultaneously, we’ve had serious discussions with russia and have received strong signals that they are ready for peace. wouldn’t that be beautiful? wouldn’t that be beautiful? wouldn’t that be beautiful?it’s time to stop this madness. t’s time to halt the killing. it’s time to end this senseless war. if you want to end wars, you have to talk to both sides.nearly four years ago, amid rising tensions, a history teacher named marc fogel was detained in russia and sentenced to 14 years in a penal colony. rough stuff.the previous administration barely lifted a finger to help him. they knew he was innocent, but they had no idea where to begin. but last summer, i promised his 95-year-old mother, malphine, that we would bring her boy safely back home.after 22 days in office, i did just that, and they are here tonight.to marc and his great mom, we are delighted to have you safe and sound and with us.as fate would have it, marc fogel was born in a small, rural town — in butler, pennsylvania — have you heard of it? — where his mother has lived for the past 78 years.i just happened to go there last july 13th for a rally. that was not pleasant. and that is where i met his beautiful mom, right before i walked onto that stage. and i told her i would not forget what she said about her son. and i never did, did i? never forgot.less than 10 minutes later, at that same rally, gunfire rang out, and a sick and deranged assassin unloaded eight bullets from his sniper’s perch into a crowd of many thousands of people.my life was saved by a fraction of an inch, but some were not so lucky. corey comperatore was a firefighter, a veteran, a christian, a husband, a devoted father, and, above all, a protector.when the sound of gunshots pierced the air — it was a horrible sound — corey knew instantly what it was and what to do. he threw himself on top of his wife and daughters and shielded them from the bullets with his own body.corey was hit really hard. you know the story from there. he sacrificed his life to save theirs.two others — very fine people — were also seriously hit. but thankfully, with the help of two great country doctors, we thought they were gone, and they were saved. so, those doctors had great talent.we’re joined by corey’s wife, helen, who was his high school sweetheart, and their two beloved daughters, allyson and kaylee. thank you.to helen, allyson, and kaylee, corey is looking down on his three beautiful ladies right now, and he is cheering you on. he loves you. he is cheering you on.corey was taken from us much too soon, but his destiny was to leave us all with a shining example of the selfless devotion of a true american patriot. it was love like corey’s that built our country, and it’s love like corey’s that is going to make our country more majestic than ever before.i believe that my life was saved that day in butler for a very good reason. i was saved by god to make america great again. ;i believe that. thank you.thank you. thank you very much.from the patriots of lexington and concord to the heroes of gettysburg and normandy, from the warriors who crossed the delaware to the trailblazers who climbed the rockies, and from the legends who soared at kitty hawk to the astronauts who touched the moon, americans have always been the people who defied all odds, transcended all dangers, made the most extraordinary sacrifices, and did whatever it took to defend our children, our country, and our freedom.and as we have seen in this chamber tonight, that same strength, faith, love, and spirit is still alive and thriving in the hearts of the american people. despite the best efforts of those who would try to censor us, silence us, break us, destroy us, americans are today a proud, free, sovereign, and independent nation that will always be free, and we will fight for it till death.we will never let anything happen to our beloved country, because we are a country of doers, dreamers, fighters, and survivors.our ancestors crossed a vast ocean, strode into the unknown wilderness, and carved their fortunes from the rock and soil of a perilous and very dangerous frontier. they chased our destiny across a boundless continent. they built the railroads, laid the highways, and graced the world with american marvels, like the empire state building, the mighty hoover dam, and the towering golden gate bridge.they lit the world with electricity, broke free of the force of gravity, fired up the engines of american industry, vanquished the communists, fascists, and marxists all over the world, and gave us countless modern wonders sculpted out of iron, glass, and steel.we stand on the shoulders of these pioneers who won and built the modern age, these workers who poured their sweat into the skylines of our cities, these warriors who shed their blood on fields of battle and gave everything they had for our rights and for our freedom.now it is our time to take up the righteous cause of american liberty, and it is our turn to take america’s destiny into our own hands and begin the most thrilling days in the history of our country.this will be our greatest era.with god’s help, over the next four years, we are going to lead this nation even higher, and we are going to forge the freest, most advanced, most dynamic, and most dominant civilization ever to exist on the face of this earth.we are going to create the highest quality of life, build the safest and wealthiest and healthiest and most vital communities anywhere in the world.we are going to conquer the vast frontiers of science, and we are going to lead humanity into space and plant the american flag on the planet mars and even far beyond.and, through it all, we are going to rediscover the unstoppable power of the american spirit, and we are going to renew unlimited promise of the american dream.every single day, we will stand up and we will fight, fight, fight for the country our citizens believe in and for the country our people deserve. thank you. thank you.my fellow americans, get ready for an incredible future, because the golden age of america has only just begun. t will be like nothing that has ever been seen before.thank you. god bless you. and god bless america. madam speaker, madam vice president, our first lady and second gentleman. members of congress and the cabinet. justices of the supreme court. my fellow americans. last year covid-19 kept us apart. this year we are finally together again. tonight, we meet as democrats, republicans, and independents. but most importantly as americans. with a duty to one another to the american people to the constitution. and with an unwavering resolve that freedom will always triumph over tyranny. six days ago, russia’s vladimir putin sought to shake the foundations of the free world thinking he could make it bend to his menacing ways. but he badly miscalculated. he thought he could roll into ukraine and the world would roll over. instead he met a wall of strength he never imagined. he met the ukrainian people. from president zelenskyy to every ukrainian, their fearlessness, their courage, their determination, inspires the world. groups of citizens blocking tanks with their bodies. everyone from students to retirees, teachers turned soldiers defending their homeland. in this struggle as president zelenskyy said in his speech to the european parliament “light will win over darkness.” the ukrainian ambassador to the united states is here tonight. let each of us here tonight in this chamber send an unmistakable signal to ukraine and to the world. please rise if you are able and show that, yes, we the united states of america stand with the ukrainian people. throughout our history, we’ve learned this lesson when dictators do not pay a price for their aggression, they cause more chaos. they keep moving. and the costs and the threats to america and the world keep rising. that’s why the nato alliance was created to secure peace and stability in europe after world war 2. the united states is a member along with 29 other nations. it matters. american diplomacy matters. american resolve matters. putin’s latest attack on ukraine was premeditated and unprovoked. he rejected repeated efforts at diplomacy. he thought the west and nato wouldn’t respond. and he thought he could divide us at home. putin was wrong. we were ready. here is what we did. we prepared extensively and carefully. we spent months building a coalition of other freedom-loving nations from europe and the americas to asia and africa to confront putin. i spent countless hours unifying our european allies. we shared with the world in advance what we knew putin was planning and precisely how he would try to falsely justify his aggression. we countered russia’s lies with truth. and now that he has acted, the free world is holding him accountable. along with twenty-seven members of the european union including france, germany, italy, as well as countries like the united kingdom, canada, japan, korea, australia, new zealand, and many others, even switzerland. we are inflicting pain on russia and supporting the people of ukraine. putin is now isolated from the world more than ever. together with our allies, we are right now enforcing powerful economic sanctions. we are cutting off russia’s largest banks from the international financial system. preventing russia’s central bank from defending the russian ruble, making putin’s $630 billion “war fund” worthless. we are choking off russia’s access to technology that will sap its economic strength and weaken its military for years to come. tonight, i say to the russian oligarchs and corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime, no more. the us department of justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of russian oligarchs. we are joining with our european allies to find and seize your yachts, your luxury apartments, your private jets. we are coming for your ill-begotten gains. and tonight, i am announcing that we will join our allies in closing off american air space to all russian flights—further isolating russia and adding an additional squeeze on their economy. the ruble has lost 30 percent of its value. the russian stock market has lost 40 percent of its value and trading remains suspended. russia’s economy is reeling, and putin alone is to blame. together with our allies, we are providing support to the ukrainians in their fight for freedom. military assistance. economic assistance. humanitarian assistance. we are giving more than $1 billion in direct assistance to ukraine. and we will continue to aid the ukrainian people as they defend their country and to help ease their suffering. let me be clear, our forces are not engaged and will not engage in conflict with russian forces in ukraine. our forces are not going to europe to fight in ukraine, but to defend our nato allies—in the event that putin decides to keep moving west. for that purpose, we’ve mobilized american ground forces, air squadrons, and ship deployments to protect nato countries including poland, romania, latvia, lithuania, and estonia. as i have made crystal clear, the united states and our allies will defend every inch of territory of nato countries with the full force of our collective power. and we remain clear-eyed. the ukrainians are fighting back with pure courage. but the next few days weeks, months, will be hard on them. putin has unleashed violence and chaos. but while he may make gains on the battlefield, he will pay a continuing high price over the long run. and a proud ukrainian people, who have known 30 years of independence, have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backwards. to all americans, i will be honest with you, as i’ve always promised. a russian dictator, invading a foreign country, has costs around the world. and i’m taking robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at russia’s economy. and i will use every tool at our disposal to protect american businesses and consumers. tonight, i can announce that the united states has worked with 30 other countries to release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves around the world. america will lead that effort, releasing 30 million barrels from our own strategic petroleum reserve. and we stand ready to do more if necessary, unified with our allies. these steps will help blunt gas prices here at home. and i know the news about what’s happening can seem alarming. but i want you to know that we are going to be okay. when the history of this era is written, putin’s war on ukraine will have left russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger. while it shouldn’t have taken something so terrible for people around the world to see what’s at stake, now everyone sees it clearly. we see the unity among leaders of nations and a more unified europe, a more unified west. and we see unity among the people who are gathering in cities in large crowds around the world, even in russia, to demonstrate their support for ukraine. in the battle between democracy and autocracy, democracies are rising to the moment, and the world is clearly choosing the side of peace and security. this is a real test. it’s going to take time. so let us continue to draw inspiration from the iron will of the ukrainian people. to our fellow ukrainian americans who forge a deep bond that connects our two nations, we stand with you. putin may circle kyiv with tanks, but he will never gain the hearts and souls of the ukrainian people. he will never extinguish their love of freedom. he will never weaken the resolve of the free world. we meet tonight in an america that has lived through two of the hardest years this nation has ever faced. the pandemic has been punishing. and so many families are living paycheck to paycheck, struggling to keep up with the rising cost of food, gas, housing, and so much more. i understand. i remember when my dad had to leave our home in scranton, pennsylvania to find work. i grew up in a family where if the price of food went up, you felt it. that’s why one of the first things i did as president was fight to pass the american rescue plan. because people were hurting. we needed to act, and we did. few pieces of legislation have done more in a critical moment in our history to lift us out of crisis. it fueled our efforts to vaccinate the nation and combat covid-19. it delivered immediate economic relief for tens of millions of americans. helped put food on their table, keep a roof over their heads, and cut the cost of health insurance. and as my dad used to say, it gave people a little breathing room. and unlike the $2-trillion tax cut passed in the previous administration that benefitted the top 1 percent of americans, the american rescue plan helped working people—and left no one behind. and it worked. it created jobs. lots of jobs. in fact—our economy created over 6.5 million new jobs just last year, more jobs created in one year than ever before in the history of america. our economy grew at a rate of 5.7 percent last year, the strongest growth in nearly 40 years, the first step in bringing fundamental change to an economy that hasn’t worked for the working people of this nation for too long. for the past 40 years, we were told that if we gave tax breaks to those at the very top, the benefits would trickle down to everyone else. but that trickle-down theory led to weaker economic growth, lower wages, bigger deficits, and the widest gap between those at the top and everyone else in nearly a century. vice president harris and i ran for office with a new economic vision for america. invest in america. educate americans. grow the workforce. build the economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. because we know that when the middle class grows, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy do very well. america used to have the best roads, bridges, and airports on earth. now our infrastructure is ranked 13th in the world. we won’t be able to compete for the jobs of the 21st century if we don’t fix that. that’s why it was so important to pass the bipartisan infrastructure law—the most sweeping investment to rebuild america in history. this was a bipartisan effort, and i want to thank the members of both parties who worked to make it happen. we’re done talking about infrastructure weeks. we’re going to have an infrastructure decade. it is going to transform america and put us on a path to win the economic competition of the 21st century that we face with the rest of the world—particularly with china. as i’ve told xi jinping, it is never a good bet to bet against the american people. we’ll create good jobs for millions of americans, modernizing roads, airports, ports, and waterways all across america. and we’ll do it all to withstand the devastating effects of the climate crisis and promote environmental justice. we’ll build a national network of 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations, begin to replace poisonous lead pipes—so every child—and every american—has clean water to drink at home and at school, provide affordable high-speed internet for every american—urban, suburban, rural, and tribal communities. 4,000 projects have already been announced. and tonight, i’m announcing that this year we will start fixing over 65,000 miles of highway and 1,500 bridges in disrepair. when we use taxpayer dollars to rebuild america—we are going to buy american: buy american products to support american jobs. the federal government spends about $600 billion a year to keep the country safe and secure. there’s been a law on the books for almost a century to make sure taxpayers’ dollars support american jobs and businesses. every administration says they’ll do it, but we are actually doing it. we will buy american to make sure everything from the deck of an aircraft carrier to the steel on highway guardrails are made in america. but to compete for the best jobs of the future, we also need to level the playing field with china and other competitors. that’s why it is so important to pass the bipartisan innovation act sitting in congress that will make record investments in emerging technologies and american manufacturing. let me give you one example of why it’s so important to pass it. if you travel 20 miles east of columbus, ohio, you’ll find 1,000 empty acres of land. it won’t look like much, but if you stop and look closely, you’ll see a “field of dreams,” the ground on which america’s future will be built. this is where intel, the american company that helped build silicon valley, is going to build its $20 billion semiconductor “mega site.” up to eight state-of-the-art factories in one place, 10,000 new good-paying jobs. some of the most sophisticated manufacturing in the world to make computer chips the size of a fingertip that power the world and our everyday lives. smartphones. the internet. technology we have yet to invent. but that’s just the beginning. intel’s ceo, pat gelsinger, who is here tonight, told me they are ready to increase their investment from $20 billion to $100 billion. that would be one of the biggest investments in manufacturing in american history. and all they’re waiting for is for you to pass this bill. so let’s not wait any longer. send it to my desk. i’ll sign it. and we will really take off. and intel is not alone. there’s something happening in america. just look around and you’ll see an amazing story. the rebirth of the pride that comes from stamping products “made in america.” the revitalization of american manufacturing. companies are choosing to build new factories here, when just a few years ago, they would have built them overseas. that’s what is happening. ford is investing $11 billion to build electric vehicles, creating 11,000 jobs across the country. gm is making the largest investment in its history—$7 billion to build electric vehicles, creating 4,000 jobs in michigan. all told, we created 369,000 new manufacturing jobs in america just last year. powered by people i’ve met like jojo burgess, from generations of union steelworkers from pittsburgh, who’s here with us tonight. as ohio senator sherrod brown says, “it’s time to bury the label “rust belt.” it’s time. but with all the bright spots in our economy, record job growth and higher wages, too many families are struggling to keep up with the bills. inflation is robbing them of the gains they might otherwise feel. i get it. that’s why my top priority is getting prices under control. look, our economy roared back faster than most predicted, but the pandemic meant that businesses had a hard time hiring enough workers to keep up production in their factories. the pandemic also disrupted global supply chains. when factories close, it takes longer to make goods and get them from the warehouse to the store, and prices go up. look at cars. last year, there weren’t enough semiconductors to make all the cars that people wanted to buy. and guess what, prices of automobiles went up. so—we have a choice. one way to fight inflation is to drive down wages and make americans poorer. i have a better plan to fight inflation. lower your costs, not your wages. make more cars and semiconductors in america. more infrastructure and innovation in america. more goods moving faster and cheaper in america. more jobs where you can earn a good living in america. and instead of relying on foreign supply chains, let’s make it in america. economists call it “increasing the productive capacity of our economy.” i call it building a better america. my plan to fight inflation will lower your costs and lower the deficit. seventeen nobel laureates in economics say my plan will ease long-term inflationary pressures. top business leaders and most americans support my plan. and here’s the plan: first—cut the cost of prescription drugs. just look at insulin. one in ten americans has diabetes. in virginia, i met a 13-year-old boy named joshua davis. he and his dad both have type 1 diabetes, which means they need insulin every day. insulin costs about $10 a vial to make. but drug companies charge families like joshua and his dad up to 30 times more. i spoke with joshua’s mom. imagine what it’s like to look at your child who needs insulin and have no idea how you’re going to pay for it. what it does to your dignity, your ability to look your child in the eye, to be the parent you expect to be. joshua is here with us tonight. yesterday was his birthday. happy birthday, buddy. for joshua, and for the 200,000 other young people with type 1 diabetes, let’s cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month so everyone can afford it. drug companies will still do very well. and while we’re at it let medicare negotiate lower prices for prescription drugs, like the va already does. look, the american rescue plan is helping millions of families on affordable care act plans save $2,400 a year on their health care premiums. let’s close the coverage gap and make those savings permanent. second—cut energy costs for families an average of $500 a year by combatting climate change. let’s provide investments and tax credits to weatherize your homes and businesses to be energy efficient and you get a tax credit; double america’s clean energy production in solar, wind, and so much more; lower the price of electric vehicles, saving you another $80 a month because you’ll never have to pay at the gas pump again. third—cut the cost of child care. many families pay up to $14,000 a year for child care per child. middle-class and working families shouldn’t have to pay more than 7 percent of their income for care of young children. my plan will cut the cost in half for most families and help parents, including millions of women, who left the workforce during the pandemic because they couldn’t afford child care, to be able to get back to work. my plan doesn’t stop there. it also includes home and long-term care. more affordable housing. and pre-k for every 3- and 4-year-old. all of these will lower costs. and under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in new taxes. nobody. the one thing all americans agree on is that the tax system is not fair. we have to fix it. i’m not looking to punish anyone. but let’s make sure corporations and the wealthiest americans start paying their fair share. just last year, 55 fortune 500 corporations earned $40 billion in profits and paid zero dollars in federal income tax. that’s simply not fair. that’s why i’ve proposed a 15-percent minimum tax rate for corporations. we got more than 130 countries to agree on a global minimum tax rate so companies can’t get out of paying their taxes at home by shipping jobs and factories overseas. that’s why i’ve proposed closing loopholes so the very wealthy don’t pay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a firefighter. so that’s my plan. it will grow the economy and lower costs for families. so what are we waiting for? let’s get this done. and while you’re at it, confirm my nominees to the federal reserve, which plays a critical role in fighting inflation. my plan will not only lower costs to give families a fair shot, it will lower the deficit. the previous administration not only ballooned the deficit with tax cuts for the very wealthy and corporations, it undermined the watchdogs whose job was to keep pandemic relief funds from being wasted. but in my administration, the watchdogs have been welcomed back. we’re going after the criminals who stole billions in relief money meant for small businesses and millions of americans. and tonight, i’m announcing that the justice department will name a chief prosecutor for pandemic fraud. by the end of this year, the deficit will be down to less than half what it was before i took office. the only president ever to cut the deficit by more than one trillion dollars in a single year. lowering your costs also means demanding more competition. i’m a capitalist, but capitalism without competition isn’t capitalism. it’s exploitation—and it drives up prices. when corporations don’t have to compete, their profits go up, your prices go up, and small businesses and family farmers and ranchers go under. we see it happening with ocean carriers moving goods in and out of america. during the pandemic, these foreign-owned companies raised prices by as much as 1,000 percent and made record profits. tonight, i’m announcing a crackdown on these companies overcharging american businesses and consumers. and as wall street firms take over more nursing homes, quality in those homes has gone down and costs have gone up. that ends on my watch. medicare is going to set higher standards for nursing homes and make sure your loved ones get the care they deserve and expect. we’ll also cut costs and keep the economy going strong by giving workers a fair shot, provide more training and apprenticeships, hire them based on their skills not degrees. let’s pass the paycheck fairness act and paid leave. raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour and extend the child tax credit, so no one has to raise a family in poverty. let’s increase pell grants and increase our historic support of hbcus, and invest in what jill—our first lady who teaches full-time—calls america’s best-kept secret: community colleges. and let’s pass the pro act when a majority of workers want to form a union—they shouldn’t be stopped. when we invest in our workers, when we build the economy from the bottom up and the middle out together, we can do something we haven’t done in a long time: build a better america. for more than two years, covid-19 has impacted every decision in our lives and the life of the nation. and i know you’re tired, frustrated, and exhausted. but i also know this. because of the progress we’ve made, because of your resilience and the tools we have, tonight i can say we are moving forward safely, back to more normal routines. we’ve reached a new moment in the fight against covid-19, with severe cases down to a level not seen since last july. just a few days ago, the centers for disease control and prevention—the cdc—issued new mask guidelines. under these new guidelines, most americans in most of the country can now be mask free. and based on the projections, more of the country will reach that point across the next couple of weeks. thanks to the progress we have made this past year, covid-19 need no longer control our lives. i know some are talking about “living with covid-19.” tonight i say that we will never just accept living with covid-19. we will continue to combat the virus as we do other diseases. and because this is a virus that mutates and spreads, we will stay on guard. here are four common sense steps as we move forward safely. first, stay protected with vaccines and treatments. we know how incredibly effective vaccines are. if you’re vaccinated and boosted, you have the highest degree of protection. we will never give up on vaccinating more americans. now, i know parents with kids under 5 are eager to see a vaccine authorized for their children. the scientists are working hard to get that done and we’ll be ready with plenty of vaccines when they do. we’re also ready with anti-viral treatments. if you get covid-19, the pfizer pill reduces your chances of ending up in the hospital by 90 percent. we’ve ordered more of these pills than anyone in the world. and pfizer is working overtime to get us 1 million pills this month and more than double that next month. and we’re launching the “test to treat” initiative so people can get tested at a pharmacy, and if they’re positive, receive antiviral pills on the spot at no cost. if you’re immunocompromised or have some other vulnerability, we have treatments and free high-quality masks. we’re leaving no one behind or ignoring anyone’s needs as we move forward. and on testing, we have made hundreds of millions of tests available for you to order for free. even if you already ordered free tests tonight, i am announcing that you can order more from covidtests.gov starting next week. second—we must prepare for new variants. over the past year, we’ve gotten much better at detecting new variants. if necessary, we’ll be able to deploy new vaccines within 100 days instead of many more months or years. and, if congress provides the funds we need, we’ll have new stockpiles of tests, masks, and pills ready if needed. i cannot promise a new variant won’t come. but i can promise you we’ll do everything within our power to be ready if it does. third—we can end the shutdown of schools and businesses. we have the tools we need. it’s time for americans to get back to work and fill our great downtowns again. people working from home can feel safe to begin to return to the office. we’re doing that here in the federal government. the vast majority of federal workers will once again work in person. our schools are open. let’s keep it that way. our kids need to be in school. and with 75 percent of adult americans fully vaccinated and hospitalizations down by 77 percent, most americans can remove their masks, return to work, stay in the classroom, and move forward safely. we achieved this because we provided free vaccines, treatments, tests, and masks. of course, continuing this costs money. i will soon send congress a request. the vast majority of americans have used these tools and may want to again, so i expect congress to pass it quickly. fourth, we will continue vaccinating the world. we’ve sent 475 million vaccine doses to 112 countries, more than any other nation. and we won’t stop. we have lost so much to covid-19. time with one another. and worst of all, so much loss of life. let’s use this moment to reset. let’s stop looking at covid-19 as a partisan dividing line and see it for what it is: a god-awful disease. let’s stop seeing each other as enemies, and start seeing each other for who we really are: fellow americans. we can’t change how divided we’ve been. but we can change how we move forward—on covid-19 and other issues we must face together. i recently visited the new york city police department days after the funerals of officer wilbert mora and his partner, officer jason rivera. they were responding to a 9-1-1 call when a man shot and killed them with a stolen gun. officer mora was 27 years old. officer rivera was 22. both dominican americans who’d grown up on the same streets they later chose to patrol as police officers. i spoke with their families and told them that we are forever in debt for their sacrifice, and we will carry on their mission to restore the trust and safety every community deserves. i’ve worked on these issues a long time. i know what works: investing in crime prevention and community police officers who’ll walk the beat, who’ll know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety. so let’s not abandon our streets. or choose between safety and equal justice. let’s come together to protect our communities, restore trust, and hold law enforcement accountable. that’s why the justice department required body cameras, banned chokeholds, and restricted no-knock warrants for its officers. that’s why the american rescue plan provided $350 billion that cities, states, and counties can use to hire more police and invest in proven strategies like community violence interruption—trusted messengers breaking the cycle of violence and trauma and giving young people hope. we should all agree: the answer is not to defund the police. the answer is to fund the police with the resources and training they need to protect our communities. i ask democrats and republicans alike: pass my budget and keep our neighborhoods safe. and i will keep doing everything in my power to crack down on gun trafficking and ghost guns you can buy online and make at home—they have no serial numbers and can’t be traced. and i ask congress to pass proven measures to reduce gun violence. pass universal background checks. why should anyone on a terrorist list be able to purchase a weapon? ban assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. repeal the liability shield that makes gun manufacturers the only industry in america that can’t be sued. these laws don’t infringe on the second amendment. they save lives. the most fundamental right in america is the right to vote—and to have it counted. and it’s under assault. in state after state, new laws have been passed, not only to suppress the vote, but to subvert entire elections. we cannot let this happen. tonight. i call on the senate to: pass the freedom to vote act. pass the john lewis voting rights act. and while you’re at it, pass the disclose act so americans can know who is funding our elections. tonight, i’d like to honor someone who has dedicated his life to serve this country: justice stephen breyer—an army veteran, constitutional scholar, and retiring justice of the united states supreme court. justice breyer, thank you for your service. one of the most serious constitutional responsibilities a president has is nominating someone to serve on the united states supreme court. and i did that 4 days ago, when i nominated circuit court of appeals judge ketanji brown jackson. one of our nation’s top legal minds, who will continue justice breyer’s legacy of excellence. a former top litigator in private practice. a former federal public defender. and from a family of public-school educators and police officers. a consensus builder. since she’s been nominated, she’s received a broad range of support—from the fraternal order of police to former judges appointed by democrats and republicans. and if we are to advance liberty and justice, we need to secure the border and fix the immigration system. we can do both. at our border, we’ve installed new technology like cutting-edge scanners to better detect drug smuggling. we’ve set up joint patrols with mexico and guatemala to catch more human traffickers. we’re putting in place dedicated immigration judges so families fleeing persecution and violence can have their cases heard faster. we’re securing commitments and supporting partners in south and central america to host more refugees and secure their own borders. we can do all this while keeping lit the torch of liberty that has led generations of immigrants to this land—my forefathers and so many of yours. provide a pathway to citizenship for dreamers, those on temporary status, farm workers, and essential workers. revise our laws so businesses have the workers they need and families don’t wait decades to reunite. it’s not only the right thing to do—it’s the economically smart thing to do. that’s why immigration reform is supported by everyone from labor unions to religious leaders to the us chamber of commerce. let’s get it done once and for all. advancing liberty and justice also requires protecting the rights of women. the constitutional right affirmed in roe v. wade—standing precedent for half a century—is under attack as never before. if we want to go forward—not backward—we must protect access to health care. preserve a woman’s right to choose. and let’s continue to advance maternal health care in america. and for our lgbtq+ americans, let’s finally get the bipartisan equality act to my desk. the onslaught of state laws targeting transgender americans and their families is wrong. as i said last year, especially to our younger transgender americans, i will always have your back as your president, so you can be yourself and reach your god-given potential. while it often appears that we never agree, that isn’t true. i signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year. from preventing government shutdowns to protecting asian-americans from still-too-common hate crimes to reforming military justice. and soon, we’ll strengthen the violence against women act that i first wrote three decades ago. it is important for us to show the nation that we can come together and do big things. so tonight i’m offering a unity agenda for the nation. four big things we can do together. first, beat the opioid epidemic. there is so much we can do. increase funding for prevention, treatment, harm reduction, and recovery. get rid of outdated rules that stop doctors from prescribing treatments. and stop the flow of illicit drugs by working with state and local law enforcement to go after traffickers. if you’re suffering from addiction, know you are not alone. i believe in recovery, and i celebrate the 23 million americans in recovery. second, let’s take on mental health. especially among our children, whose lives and education have been turned upside down. the american rescue plan gave schools money to hire teachers and help students make up for lost learning. i urge every parent to make sure your school does just that. and we can all play a part—sign up to be a tutor or a mentor. children were also struggling before the pandemic. bullying, violence, trauma, and the harms of social media. as frances haugen, who is here with us tonight, has shown, we must hold social media platforms accountable for the national experiment they’re conducting on our children for profit. it’s time to strengthen privacy protections, ban targeted advertising to children, demand tech companies stop collecting personal data on our children. and let’s get all americans the mental health services they need. more people they can turn to for help, and full parity between physical and mental health care. third, support our veterans. veterans are the best of us. i’ve always believed that we have a sacred obligation to equip all those we send to war and care for them and their families when they come home. my administration is providing assistance with job training and housing, and now helping lower-income veterans get va care debt-free. our troops in iraq and afghanistan faced many dangers. one was stationed at bases and breathing in toxic smoke from “burn pits” that incinerated wastes of war—medical and hazard material, jet fuel, and more. when they came home, many of the world’s fittest and best trained warriors were never the same. headaches. numbness. dizziness. a cancer that would put them in a flag-draped coffin. i know. one of those soldiers was my son major beau biden. we don’t know for sure if a burn pit was the cause of his brain cancer, or the diseases of so many of our troops. but i’m committed to finding out everything we can. committed to military families like danielle robinson from ohio. the widow of sergeant first class heath robinson. he was born a soldier. army national guard. combat medic in kosovo and iraq. stationed near baghdad, just yards from burn pits the size of football fields. heath’s widow danielle is here with us tonight. they loved going to ohio state football games. he loved building legos with their daughter. but cancer from prolonged exposure to burn pits ravaged heath’s lungs and body. danielle says heath was a fighter to the very end. he didn’t know how to stop fighting, and neither did she. through her pain she found purpose to demand we do better. tonight, danielle—we are. the va is pioneering new ways of linking toxic exposures to diseases, already helping more veterans get benefits. and tonight, i’m announcing we’re expanding eligibility to veterans suffering from nine respiratory cancers. i’m also calling on congress: pass a law to make sure veterans devastated by toxic exposures in iraq and afghanistan finally get the benefits and comprehensive health care they deserve. and fourth, let’s end cancer as we know it. this is personal to me and jill, to kamala, and to so many of you. cancer is the #2 cause of death in america—second only to heart disease. last month, i announced our plan to supercharge the cancer moonshot that president obama asked me to lead six years ago. our goal is to cut the cancer death rate by at least 50 percent over the next 25 years, turn more cancers from death sentences into treatable diseases. more support for patients and families. to get there, i call on congress to fund arpa-h, the advanced research projects agency for health. it’s based on darpa—the defense department project that led to the internet, gps, and so much more. arpa-h will have a singular purpose—to drive breakthroughs in cancer, alzheimer’s, diabetes, and more. a unity agenda for the nation. we can do this. my fellow americans—tonight, we have gathered in a sacred space—the citadel of our democracy. in this capitol, generation after generation, americans have debated great questions amid great strife, and have done great things. we have fought for freedom, expanded liberty, defeated totalitarianism and terror. and built the strongest, freest, and most prosperous nation the world has ever known. now is the hour. our moment of responsibility. our test of resolve and conscience, of history itself. it is in this moment that our character is formed. our purpose is found. our future is forged. well, i know this nation. we will meet the test. to protect freedom and liberty, to expand fairness and opportunity. we will save democracy. as hard as these times have been, i am more optimistic about america today than i have been my whole life. because i see the future that is within our grasp. because i know there is simply nothing beyond our capacity. we are the only nation on earth that has always turned every crisis we have faced into an opportunity. the only nation that can be defined by a single word: possibilities. so on this night, in our 245th year as a nation, i have come to report on the state of the union. and my report is this: the state of the union is strong—because you, the american people, are strong. we are stronger today than we were a year ago. and we will be stronger a year from now than we are today. now is our moment to meet and overcome the challenges of our time. and we will, as one people. one america. the united states of america. may god bless you all. may god protect our troops. please, please sit down. thank you. thank you. good afternoon. before i take questions, i want to make — give you a progress report to the nation on where we stand 65 days into office here on vaccinations and a few other top priorities for the american people. first, on vaccinations: on december 8th, i indicated that i hoped to get 100 million shots in people’s arms in my first 100 days. we met that goal last week by day 58 — 42 days ahead of schedule. now, today, i’m setting a second goal, and that is: we will, by my 100th day in office, have administered 200 million shots in people’s arms. that’s right: 200 million shots in 100 days. i know it’s ambitious, twice our original goal, but no other country in the world has even come close — not even close — to what we are doing. and i believe we can do it. and today, we’ve made a historic investment in reaching the hardest-hit and the most vulnerable communities, the highest-risk communities — as a consequence of the virus — by investing an addition $10 billion in being able to reach them. i also set a goal, before i took office, of getting a majority of schools in k through 8 fully open in the first 100 days. now, thanks to the enormous amount of work done by our administration, educators, parents, local, state education officials and leaders — a recent department of education department survey shows that nearly half of the k-through-8 schools are open now full time, five days a week, for in-person learning. not yet a majority, but we’re really close. and i believe, in the 35 days left to go, we’ll meet that goal as well. as of yesterday, more than 100 million payments of $1,400 have gone into people’s bank accounts. that’s real money in people’s pockets, bringing relief instantly, almost. and millions more will be getting their money very soon. one final note: since we passed the american rescue plan, we’re starting to see new signs of hope in our economy. since it was passed, a majority — a majority of economic forecasters have significantly increased their projections on the economic growth that’s going to take place this year. they’re now projecting it will exceed 6 percent — a 6 percent growth in gdp. and just this morning, we learned that the number of people filing for weekly unemployment insurance fell by nearly 100,000 persons. that’s the first time in a year the number has fallen below the pre-pandemic high. so there are still too many americans out of work, too many families hurting, and we still have a lot of work to do. but i can say to you, the american people: help is here, and hope is on the way. now i’ll be happy to take your questions. zeke, the associated press. q thank you, mr. president. you mentioned your progress on covid-19. i’d like to ask you about some of the other issues facing your presidency. one of the defining challenges you face in the coming months is how to deliver on your promise to americans on issues like immigration reform, gun control, voting rights, climate change. all of those right now are facing stiff, united opposition from republicans on capitol hill. how far are you willing to go to achieve those promises that you made to the american people? well, i’m going to — look, when i took office, i decided that it was a fairly basic, simple proposition, and that is: i got elected to solve problems. and the most urgent problem facing the american people, i stated from the outset, was covid-19 and the economic dislocation for millions and millions of americans. and so that’s why i put all my focus in the beginning — there are a lot of problems — put all my focus on dealing with those particular problems. and the other problems we’re talking about, from immigration to guns and the other things you mentioned, are long-term problems; they’ve been around a long time. and what we’re going to be able to do, god willing, is now begin, one at a time, to focus on those as well, and — whether it’s immigration or guns or a number of other problems that face the country. but the fundamental problem is getting people some peace of mind so they can go to bed at night and not stare at the ceiling wondering whether they lost their health insurance, whether they’re going to lose a family member, whether they’re going to be in a position where they’re not going to be — they’re going to lose their home because they can’t pay their mortgage, or that millions of people are going to get thrown out of their homes because of the inability to — to pay their rent. so we’re going to move on these one at a time, try to do as many simultaneously as we can. but that’s the reason why i focused as i have. and here’s the deal: i think my republican colleagues are going to have to determine whether or not we want to work together, or they decide that the way in which they want to proceed is to — is to just decide to divide the country, continue the politics of division. but i’m not going to do that; i’m just going to move forward and take these things as they come. q and just to — to follow up, mr. president, can your presidency be a success if you can’t make progress on those four challenges: climate change, immigration reform, gun control, voting rights? well, i plan on making progress on all of them, but that’s going to be for the american people to decide. i think — you know, i doubt whether — maybe you did; maybe others did. i thought — many of you thought there was no possibility of my getting the plan i got passed, passed, without any republican votes. a pretty big deal. it got passed. growing the economy. people’s lives are changing. so let’s see what happens. all i know, i’ve been hired to solve problems — to solve problems, not create division. okay. how about yamiche? q thanks so much, mr. president. you’ve said over and over again that immigrants shouldn’t come to this country right now; this isn’t the time to come. that message is not being received. instead, the perception of you that got you elected — as a moral, decent man — is the reason why a lot of immigrants are coming to this country and entrusting you with unaccompanied minors. how do you resolve that tension? and how are you choosing which families can stay and which can go, given the fact that even though, with title 42, there are some families that are staying? and is there a timeline for when we won’t be seeing these overcrowded facilities with — run by cpb [sic], when it comes to unaccompanied minors? well, look, i guess i should be flattered people are coming because i’m the nice guy; that’s the reason why it’s happening — that i’m a decent man or however it’s phrased. that — you know, that’s why they’re coming, because they know biden is a good guy. the truth of the matter is: nothing has changed. as many people came — 28 percent increase in children to the border in my administration; 31 percent in the last year of — in 2019, before the pandemic, in the trump administration. it happens every single, solitary year: there is a significant increase in the number of people coming to the border in the winter months of january, february, march. that happens every year. in addition to that, there is a — and nobody — and, by the way, does anybody suggest that there was a 31 percent increase under trump because he was a nice guy and he was doing good things at the border? that’s not the reason they’re coming. the reason they’re coming is that it’s the time they can travel with the least likelihood of dying on the way because of the heat in the desert, number one. number two, they’re coming because of the circumstances in-country — in-country. the way to deal with this problem — and i started to deal with it back when i was a united states senator — i mean, vice president — putting together a bipartisan plan of over $700 million to deal with the root causes of why people are leaving. what did trump do? he eliminated that funding. he didn’t use it. he didn’t do it. and in addition to that, what he did — he dismantled all the elements that exist to deal with what had been a problem and — and has been — continued to be a problem for a long time. he, in fact, shut down the — the number of beds available. he did not fund hhs to get people to get the children out of those — those border patrol facilities where they should not be and not supposed to be more than a few days — a little while. but he dismantled all of that. and so what we’re doing now is attempting to rebuild — rebuild the system that can accommodate the — what is happening today. and i like to think it’s because i’m a nice guy, but it’s not. it’s because of what’s happened every year. let me say one other thing on this. if you take a look at the number of people who are coming, the vast majority, the overwhelming majority of people coming to the border and crossing are being sent back — are being sent back. thousands — tens of thousands of people who are — who are over 18 years of age and single — people, one at a time coming, have been sent back, sent home. we’re sending back the vast majority of the families that are coming. we’re trying to work out now, with mexico, their willingness to take more of those families back. but we — that’s what’s happening. they’re not getting across the border. and those who are coming across the border, who are unaccompanied children, we’re moving rapidly to try to put in place what was dismantled, as i said. for example, of all the children who are coming across the border, over 70 percent are either 16 or 17 years old. we’re not talking about people ripping babies from mothers’ arms or little three-year-olds standing on the border. less than — i think it’s one and a half percent fall in the category of the very young. so what we’re doing is we’re providing for the space, again, to be able to get these kids out of the border patrol facilities, which no child — no one should be in any longer than 72 hours. and today, i went to — for example, i used all the resources available to me, went to the defense department, and — and the secretary of defense has just made available fort bliss — 5,000 beds be made easily available. five thousand beds on the texas border. so we’re building back up the capacity that should have been maintained and built upon that trump dismantled. it’s going to take time. and the other thing we’re doing, i might add — am i giving you too long an answer? because if you don’t want the details — q (inaudible.) no, no, but i mean — i don’t know how much detail you want about immigration. maybe i’ll stop there and fin- — q my follow-up question is: one, if you could talk a little bit about which families — why they’re being allowed to stay. the families that are being allowed to stay, why they’re being allowed to stay. and in addition to that, when it comes to the filibuster, which is what zeke was asking about, there’s — immigration is a big issue, of course, when it — related to the filibuster, but there’s also republicans who are passing bill after bill, trying to restrict voting rights. chuck schumer is calling it an “existential threat” to democracy. why not back a filibuster rule that at least gets around issues including voting rights or immigration? jim clyburn, someone who — of course, who you know very well, has backed the idea of a filibuster rule when it comes to civil rights and voting rights. well, look, i’m going to deal with all of those problems. the question is, the priorities as they come and land on my plate. let’s go to the first question you asked — the first of the second question you asked. and that is: what about dealing with families? why are not — some not going back? because mexico is refusing to take them back. they’re saying they won’t take them back — not all of them. we’re in negotiations with the president of mexico. i think we’re going to see that change. they should all be going back, all be going back. the only people we’re not going to let sitting there on the other side of the rio grande by themselves with no help are children. and what we’re doing there, and it’s an important point to understand — i know you understand; i don’t mean to say it that way — an important point to focus on: the vast majority of people under the age of 18 coming to united states come with a telephone number on a wristband or come with a telephone number in their pocket in the united states — a mother, a father, a close relative, a grandmom or a grandpop. what was happening before is it was taking literally weeks and weeks, and maybe even months, before anybody would pick up the phone and call to see if there really was someone there. well, we’ve set up a system now where, within 24 hours, there’s a phone call made as that person or that child crosses the border. and then a verification system is being put in place as of today to determine quickly whether or not that is a trafficker being called or that is actually a mom, a dad, and/or a close relative. they’re establishing that right off the bat. if it, in fact, is mom or dad, dad says — to take the extreme case — “i got a birth certificate.” then guess what? we’re getting that kid directly to that parent immediately. and so that’s going to reduce significantly — there’s two ways to reduce child populations in circumstances that are not acceptable, like being held at a border patrol station. one is to get them to the place where they have a relative and set a date as to when a hearing can be held. the second way to do it is put them in a health and human services facility that we’re occupying now — both licensed beds around the country that exist, as well as, for example, federal resources like fort bliss — to get them safely in a place where they can be taken care of while their fate is determined. q and can you answer the filibuster (inaudible)? filibuster. filibuster. you know, with regard to the filibuster, i believe we should go back to a position on the filibuster that existed just when i came to the united states senate 120 years ago. and that is that — it used to be required for the filibuster — and i had a card on this; i was going to give you the statistics, but you probably know them — that it used to be that, that from between 1917 to 1971 — the filibuster existed — there was a total of 58 motions to break a filibuster that whole time. last year alone, there were five times that many. so it’s being abused in a gigantic way. and, for example, it used to be you had to stand there and talk and talk and talk and talk until you collapsed. and guess what? people got tired of talking and tired of collapsing. filibusters broke down, and we were able to break the filibuster, get a quorum, and vote. so i strongly support moving in that direction, in addition to having an open mind about dealing with certain things that are — are just elemental to the functioning of our democracy, like the right to vote — like the basic right to vote. we’ve amended the filibuster in the past. but here’s the deal: as you observed, i’m a fairly practical guy. i want to get things done. i want to get them done, consistent with what we promised the american people. and in order to do that in a 50-50 senate, we’ve got to get to the place where i get 50 votes so that the vice president of the united states can break the tie, or i get 51 votes without her. and so, i’m going to say something outrageous: i have never been particularly poor at calculating how to get things done in the united states senate. so the best way to get something done, if you — if you hold near and dear to you that you like to be able to — anyway — i — we’re going to get a lot done. and if we have to — if there’s complete lockdown and chaos as a consequence of the filibuster, then we’ll have to go beyond what i’m talking about. okay. hang on. sorry. oh, seung min — ms. kim. q thank you, mr. president, to follow up on the filibuster: so do you believe it should take 60 votes to end a filibuster on legislation or 51? (laughs.) if we could end it with 51, we would have no problem. you’re going to have to — the existing rule — it’s going to be hard to get a parliamentary ruling that allows 50 votes to end the filibuster, the existence of a filibuster. but it’s not my expertise, in what the parliamentary rules and how to get there are. but our preoccupation with the filibuster is totally legitimate, but in the meantime, we got a lot we can do while we’re talking about what we’re going to do about the filibuster. let me get here. okay, cecilia vega. q i’d like to circle back to immigration, please. you just listed the reasons that people are coming, talking about in-country problems, saying that it happens every year; you blamed the last administration. sir, i just got back last night from a reporting trip to the border where i met nine-year-old, yossell, who walked here from honduras by himself, along with another little boy. he had that phone number on him — astounding. q — and we were able to call his family. his mother says that she sent her son to this country because she believes that you are not deporting unaccompanied minors like her son. that’s why she sent him alone from honduras. so, sir, you blamed the last administration, but is your messaging — in saying that these children are and will be allowed to stay in this country and work their way through this process — encouraging families like yossell says to come? well, look, the idea that i’m going to say — which i would never do — “if an unaccompanied child ends up at the border, we’re just going to let him starve to death and stay on the other side” — no previous administration did that either, except trump. i’m not going to do it. i’m not going to do it. that’s why i’ve asked the vice president of the united states, yesterday, to be the lead person on dealing with focusing on the fundamental reasons why people leave honduras, guatemala, and el salvador in the first place. it’s because of earthquakes, floods. it’s because of lack of food. it’s because of gang violence. it’s because of a whole range of things. that — when i was vice president and had the same obligation to deal with unaccompanied children, i was able to get it slowed up significantly by working with the heads of state of those communities to do things like — in one of the major cities, the reason people were leaving is they couldn’t walk in the street because they were getting — their kids were getting beat up or shot or in gang violence. well, what i was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but i was able to say, “okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? i’ll put the lighting in.” we got a contractor. we got the type of lighting. we paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the government. and violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. fewer people sought to leave. when this hurricane occurred — two hurricanes — instead of us going down and helping in a major way, so that people would not have reason to want to leave in the first place because they didn’t have housing or water or sustenance, we did nothing. we’re going to do a lot in our administration. we’re going to be spending that 700-plus million dollars a year to change the life and circumstances of why people leave in the first place. that mother did not sit around with — on the kitchen table and say, “you know, i got a great idea: the way i’m going to make sure my son get taken care of is i’m going to put a…” — how old was he, or she? q he’s — he’s nine. i also met a 10-year-old. a nine-year-old. “i’m going to send him on a thousand-mile journey across the desert and up to the united states because i know joe biden is a nice guy and he’ll take care of him.” what a desperate act to have to take. the circumstances must be horrible. so we can do something about that. that’s what the vice president is going to be doing: what i did. when president obama asked me to come and deal, i was in — i was in turkey at the time, and he said, “you got to come home and take care of this.” so we put together a plan and it had an impact. and so, the question here is whether — how we go ahead and do this; what we do. there’s no easy answer q a quick follow, if i may. do you want to see these unaccompanied minors staying in this country, or should they be deported eventually? well, the judgment has to be made whether or not — and in this young man’s case, he has a mom at home; there’s an overwhelming reason why he’d be put in a plane and flown back to his mom. q final follow, sir. you mentioned circumstances that must be horrific. the customs and border protection facility in donna, texas — i was there — is at 1,556 percent capacity — yep. q — right now, with mostly unaccompanied minors. there are kids that are sleeping on floors. they are packed into these pods. i’ve spoken to lawyers who say that they — some of these children have not seen the sun in days. what’s your reaction — what is your reaction to these images that have come out from that particular facility? is what’s happening inside acceptable to you? and when is this going to be fixed? is — that’s a serious question, right? is it acceptable to me? come on. that’s why we’re going to be moving a thousand of those kids out quickly. that’s why i got fort bliss opened up. that’s why i’ve been working from the moment this started to happen to try to find additional access for children to be able to safely — not just children, but particularly children — to be able to safely be housed while we follow through on the rest of what’s happening. that is totally unacceptable. ken. q thank you, mr. president. i wanted to ask you about afghanistan. you face a may 1st deadline for the withdrawal of u.s. troops from that country. as a candidate, in foreign affairs, you wrote that it is past time to end these forever wars. can you commit to the american people that by may 2nd the u.s. will no longer have forces in afghanistan? the answer is that it’s going to be hard to meet the may 1 deadline. just in terms of tactical reasons, it’s hard to get those troops out. so, what we’ve been doing — what i’ve been doing and what secretary blinken has been doing — has been — we’ve been meeting with our allies, those other nations that have nato allies who have troops in afghanistan as well. and if we leave, we’re going to do so in a safe and orderly way. we’re in consultation, i said, with our allies and partners in how to proceed. and secretary blinken is meeting in brussels this week with our nato allies, particularly those who have forces there. and general austin is — just met with ghani and i’m waiting for the briefing on that. he is the — the “leader,” quote, in afghanistan and kabul. and there’s a u.n.-led process that’s beginning shortly on how to mechanically get people — how to end this war. but it is not my intention to stay there for a long time. but the question is: how and in what circumstances do we meet that agreement that was made by president trump to leave under a deal that looks like it’s not being able to be worked out to begin with? how is that done? but we are not staying a long time. q you just said “if we leave.” do you think it’s possible that we– we will leave. the question is when we leave. q do you — sorry — do you believe, though, it’s possible we could have troops there next year? i — i can’t picture that being the case. okay. kristen. q thank you very much, mr. president. given the conditions that were just laid out at the migrant facilities at the u.s. border, will you commit to allowing journalists to have access to the facilities that are overcrowded moving forward? i will commit when my plan, very shortly, is underway to let you have access to not just them, but to other facilities as well. q how soon will journalists be able to have access to the facilities? we’ve obviously been allowed to be inside one, but we haven’t seen the facilities in which children are packed together to really give the american people a chance to see that. will you commit to transparency on this issue, mr. president? i will commit to transparency, and — as soon as i am in a position to be able to implement what we are doing right now. and one of the reasons i haven’t gone down — i have all my — my chief folks have gone down — is i don’t want to become the issue. i don’t want to be, you know, bringing all of the secret service and everybody with me to get in the way. so this is being set up, and you’ll have full access to everything once we get this thing moving. q okay. and just to be clear: how soon will that be, mr. president? i don’t know, to be clear. q okay. and do you bear responsibility for everything that’s happening at the border now? i hear you talking a lot about the past administration. you decided to roll back some of those policies, did you move too quickly to roll back (inaudible) policies? to roll back what? i’m sorry. q did you move too quickly to roll back some of the executive orders of your predecessor? first of all, all the policies that were underway were not helping at all — did not slow up the amount of immigration — and there’s many people coming. and rolling back the policies of separating children from — from their mothers, i make no apology for that. rolling back the policies of “remain in mexico,” sitting on the edge of the rio grande in a muddy circumstance with not enough to eat and — i make no apologies for that. i make no apologies for ending programs that did not exist before trump became president that have an incredibly negative impact on the law, international law, as well as on human dignity. and so, i make no apologies for that. q if i could just ask you about foreign policy, mr. president. overnight, we learned that north korea tested two ballistic missiles. what, if any, actions will you take? and what is your red line on north korea? let me say that, number one, u.n. resolution 1718 was violated by those particular missiles that were tested — number one. we’re consulting with our allies and partners. and there will be responses — if they choose to escalate, we will respond accordingly. but i’m also prepared for some form of diplomacy, but it has to be conditioned upon the end result of denuclearization. so that’s what we’re doing right now: consulting with our allies. q just a very quick follow-up — you’ve only got another hour now, okay? q diplomacy: can you define what you mean? and former president obama warned the incoming president trump that north korea was the top foreign policy issue that he was watching. is that how you assess the crisis in north korea? yes. okay. hang on a second here, kristen. nancy, cbs. q thank you very much, mr. president. i want to go back to voting rights. and as yamiche mentioned, republican legislatures across the country are working to pass bills that would restrict voting, particularly, democrats fear, impacting minority voters and young voters — the very people who helped to get you elected in november. are you worried that if you don’t manage to pass voting rights legislation that your party is going to lose seats and possibly lose control of the house and the senate in 2022? what i’m worried about is how un-american this whole initiative is. it’s sick. it’s sick. deciding in some states that you cannot bring water to people standing in line, waiting to vote; deciding that you’re going to end voting at five o’clock when working people are just getting off work; deciding that there will be no absentee ballots under the most rigid circumstances. it’s all designed — and i’m going to spend my time doing three things: one, trying to figure out how to pass the legislation passed by the house, number one. number two, educating the american public. the republican voters i know find this despicable. republican voters, the folks out in — outside this white house. i’m not talking about the elected officials; i’m talking about voters. voters. and so i am convinced that we’ll be able to stop this because it is the most pernicious thing. this makes jim crow look like jim eagle. i mean, this is gigantic what they’re trying to do, and it cannot be sustained. i’m going to do everything in my power, along with my friends in the house and the senate, to keep that from — from becoming the law. q is there anything else you can do about it besides passing legislation? the answer is “yes,” but i’m not going to lay out a strategy in front of the whole world and you now. q and then, on a related note, have you decided whether you are going to run for reelection in 2024? you haven’t set up a reelection campaign yet, as your predecessor had by this time. (laughs.) my predecessor need do [sic] — needed to. my predecessor. oh god, i miss him. q have you — have you — no, the answer is “yes.” my plan is to run for reelection. that’s my expectation. q and then, on — on one other note, on bipartisanship: your old friend, mitch mcconnell, says you have only spoken to each other once since you took office and that you have moved far left since taking office. do you see it the same way he does? have you rejected bipartisanship? no, i haven’t at all. i’ve been meeting — when is the last time a president invited the opposite party down at least a half a dozen times to talk about issues? everything from how we work — we’re working with a group of 20 members of the senate right now and house on how we reestablish our ability to make computer chips and how we get ahead of the game, how we can work together. and we’re working together on a bunch of things. but, look, i know mitch well; mitch knows me well. i would expect mitch to say exactly what he said. but this is a matter of making sure that — i would like republican — elected republican support, but what i know i have now is that i have electoral support from republican voters. republican voters agree with what i’m doing. and so, unless mitch says the last thing i did is — the last piece of legislation is so far left — well, then he ought to a look at his party. over 50 percent of them must be over that edge as well because they support what i did. okay. where am i here? let me see. kaitlan. q thank you very much, mr. president. i have a question for you, but first i’d like to follow up on a question from yamiche, and that’s on the filibuster. that counts as a question, but go ahead. q okay. i’ll make it quick. it’s a quick question. no, no — you can. q regarding the filibuster: at john lewis’s funeral, president barack obama said he believed the filibuster was a “relic” of the jim crow era. do you agree? yes. q and if not, why not abolish it if it’s a relic of the jim crow era? successful electoral politics is the art of the possible. let’s figure out how we can get this done and move in the direction of significantly changing the abuse of even the filibuster rule first. it’s been abused from the time it came into being — by an extreme way in the last 20 years. let’s deal with the abuse first. q it sounds like you’re moving closer to eliminating the filibuster. is that correct? i answered your question. q you also just made some news by saying that you are going to run for reelection. i said, “that is my expectation.” q so is that a “yes” that you are running for reelection? look, i — i don’t know where you guys come from, man. i’ve never been able to travel. i’m a great respecter of fate. i’ve never been able to plan four and half, three and a half years ahead for certain. q and if you do — it — q if you do run, will vice president harris be on your ticket? i would fully expect that to be the case. she’s doing a great job. she’s a great partner. she’s a great partner. q and do you believe you’ll be running against former president trump? oh, come on. i don’t even think about — i don’t — i have no idea. i have no idea if there will be a republican party. do you? i know you don’t have to answer my question, but, i mean, you know, do you? i mean, look, this is — the way i view things — i’ve become a great respecter of fate in my life. i set a goal that’s in front of me to get things done for the people i care most about, which are hardworking, decent american people who are getting — really having it stuck to them. i want to change the paradigm. i want to change the paradigm. we start to reward work, not just wealth. i want to change the paradigm. if you notice — don’t you find it kind of interesting that my republican friends were worried about that the cost and the taxes that had to be had — if there is any tax to be had, as they talk about it — in dealing with the — the act that we just passed which puts money in people’s pockets — ordinary people. did you hear them complain when they passed close to a $2 trillion trump tax cut — 83 percent going to the top 1 percent? did you hear them talk about that all? i love the fact that they’ve found this whole idea of concern about the federal budget. it’s kind of amazing. when the federal budget is saving people’s lives, they don’t think it’s such a good idea. when the federal budget is feathering the nest of the wealthiest americans — 90 of the fortune 500 companies making billions of dollars not paying a cent in taxes; reducing taxes to the point that people who are making — you know, if you’re a husband and wife, a schoolteacher and a cop, you’re paying at a higher rate than the average person making a billion dollars a year is — something is wrong. their newfound concern. i’m concerned — look, i meant what i said when i ran. and a lot of you still think i’m wrong, and i respect that. i said, “i’m running for three reasons: to restore the soul, dignity, honor, honesty, transparency to the american political system; two, to rebuild the backbone of this country — the middle class, hardworking people, and people struggling to get in the middle class. they built america, and unions built them.” the third reason i said i was running was to unite the country. and, generically speaking, all of you said, “no, you can’t do that.” well, i’ve not been able to unite the congress, but i’ve been uniting the country, based on the polling data. we have to come together. we have to. so, from my perspective, you know, it’s a — to me, it’s about just, you know, getting out there, putting one foot in front of the other and just trying to make things better for people — just hardworking people. people get up every morning and just want to figure out how to put food on the table for their kids, to be able have a little bit of breathing room, being able to have — make sure that they go to bed not staring at the ceiling, like my dad, wondering whether — since he didn’t have health insurance, what happens if mom gets sick or he got sick. these are basic things. basic things. and i’m of the view that the vast majority of people, including registered republicans, by and large, share that — that same — that same view, that same sense of what is — you know, what’s appropriate. justin. justin sink, bloomberg. q thanks, mr. president. i wanted to ask about your relationship with china now that you’ve been in office for a couple months. there’s obviously the meeting in alaska that was a little theatrical, and there’s the continued human rights abuses. so, today, i’m wondering: are you more likely than you were when you came into office to maintain tariffs on china? are you considering banning imports of forced-labor products? and would you consider cutting off u.s. investment or chinese access to international payment systems? well, look, they’re each specifically legitimate questions, but they only touch a smidgen of what the relationship with china really is about. i’ve known xi jinping for a long time. allegedly, by the time i left office as vice president, i had spent more time with xi jinping than any world leader had, because president obama and the chinese president hu decided we should get to know one another since it was inappropriate for the president of the united states to spend time with the vice president of another country. but it was obvious he was going to become the new leader of china. so, i spent hours upon hours with him alone with an interpreter — my interpreter and his — going into great detail. he is very, very straightforward. doesn’t have a democratic — with a small “d” — bone in his body. but he’s a smart, smart guy. he’s one of the guys, like putin, who thinks that autocracy is the wave of the future and democracy can’t function in an ever — an ever-complex world. so, when i was elected and he called to congratulate me, i think to the surprise of the china experts who were — his people were on call as well as mine, listening — we had a two-hour conversation. for two hours. and we made several things clear to one another. i made it clear to him again what i’ve told him in person on several occasions: that we’re not looking for confrontation, although we know there will be steep, steep competition. two, that we’ll have strong competition but we’ll insist that china play by the international rules: fair competition, fair practices, fair trade. thirdly, in order to compete effectively, i indicated that we’re going to deal with china effectively, and we’re going to need three things to do that. i tell him, our people. first, we’re going to invest in american workers and american science. i said that all through the campaign and i say it again. and we’re — and i’m setting up my administration to be able to do that, which is that, you know, back in the ‘60s, we used to invest a little over 2 percent of our entire gdp in pure research and investment in science. today, it’s 0.7 percent. i’m going to change that. we’re going to change that. the future lies in who can, in fact, own the future as it relates to technology, quantum computing, a whole range of things, including in medical fields. and so what i’m going to do is make sure we invest closer to 2 percent. one of the reasons why i’ve set up the — the pab [pcast] — the president’s board with scientists and the like, again — is we’re going to invest in medical research — cancer, alzheimer’s, diabetes, the things — industries of the future — artificial intelligence, quantum computing, biotech. and we’re going to make real investments. china is out investing us by a longshot, because their plan is to own that future. the third — the second thing we’re going to do is we’re going to reestablish our alliances. and i’ve been very clear with him, it’s not anti-chinese. and we’ve talked about it. i want to make sure that, for example, later today, after this — as a matter of fact, shortly after this, which is fine; we’ve been going close to an hour. i’m happy to go longer. but one of the things that i’m going to be doing, i’m going to be speaking with the 27 heads of state in europe and very shortly — i think within the next hour or so. i don’t know the exact time. and earlier this month — and apparently it got the chinese’s attention; that’s not why i did it — i met with our allies and how we’re going to hold china accountable in the region: australia, india, japan, and the united states — the so-called quad. because we have to have democracies working together. before too long, i’m going to have — i’m going to invite an alliance of democracies to come here to discuss the future. and so we’re going to make it clear that in order to deal with these things, we are going to hold china accountable to follow the rules — to follow the rules — whether it relates to the south china sea or the north china sea, or their agreement made on taiwan, or a whole range of other things. and the third thing, and the thing that i admire about dealing with xi is he understands — he makes no pretense about not understanding what i’m saying any more than i do him — i pointed out to him: no leader can be sustained in his position or her position unless they represent the values of the country. and i said as — “and, mr. president, as i’ve told you before, americans value the notion of freedom. america values human rights. we don’t always live up to our expectations, but it’s a values system. we are founded on that principle. and as long as you and your country continues to so blatantly violate human rights, we’re going to continue, in an unrelenting way, to call to the attention of the world and make it clear — make it clear what’s happening.” and he understood that. i made it clear that no american president — at least one did — but no american president ever back down from speaking out of what’s happening to the uighurs, what’s happening in hong kong, what’s happening in-country. that’s who we are. the moment a president walks away from that, as the last one did, is the moment we begin to lose our legitimacy around the world. it’s who we are. so i see stiff competition with china. china has an overall goal, and i don’t criticize them for the goal, but they have an overall goal to become the leading country in the world, the wealthiest country in the world, and the most powerful country in the world. that’s not going to happen on my watch because the united states are going to continue to grow and expand. q all right. just to follow up on the meeting of democracies: is that where you expect, in a multilateral way, to make these decisions about sanctions? or — no, that’s not where i make the decision; that’s where i make sure we’re all on the same page. all on the same page. look, i predict to you, your children or grandchildren are going to be doing their doctoral thesis on the issue of who succeeded: autocracy or democracy? because that is what is at stake, not just with china. look around the world. we’re in the midst of a fourth industrial revolution of enormous consequence. will there be middle class? how will people adjust to these significant changes in science and technology and the environment? how will they do that? and are democracies equipped — because all the people get to speak — to compete? it is clear, absolutely clear — and most of the scholars i dealt with at penn agree with me around the country — that this is a battle between the utility of democracies in the 21st century and autocracies. if you notice, you don’t have russia talking about communism anymore. it’s about an autocracy. demand decisions made by a leader of a country — that’s what’s at stake here. we’ve got to prove democracy works. q and, mr. president, sorry, i know you haven’t had a chance to address the tragedies in georgia and colorado. you had said to stay tuned for actions that you might take on gun control. wondering if you’ve made a decision either about sending the manufacturer liability bill that you had promised on day one to capitol hill, or executive actions like going after ghost guns or giving money to cities and states to battle gun control. all the above. it’s a matter of timing. as you’ve all observed, successful presidents — better than me — have been successful, in large part, because they know how to time what they’re doing — order it, decide and prioritize what needs to be done. the next major initiative is — and i’ll be announcing it friday in pittsburgh, in detail — is to rebuild the infrastructure — both physical and technological infrastructure in this country — so that we can compete and create significant numbers of really good-paying jobs. really good-paying jobs. and some of you have been around long enough to know that used to be a great republican goal and initiative. i still think the majority of the american people don’t like the fact that we are now ranked, what, 85th in the world in infrastructure. i mean, look, the future rests on whether or not we have the best airports that are going to accommodate air travel, ports that you can get in and out of quickly, so businesses decide. some of you, if you were ever local reporters, and you found your governor or mayor trying to attract business to your community, what’s the first thing that businesses asked? “what’s the closest access to — access to an interstate highway? how far am i from a freight rail? is the water — is the water available? is there enough water available for me to conduct my business?” all the things that relate to infrastructure. we have somewhere — i asked the staff to write it down for me, and they did — not for this, but for a longer discussion. we have somewhere, in terms of infrastructure — we have — we rank 13th globally in infrastructure. china is investing three times more in infrastructure than the united states is. bridges: more than one third of our bridges — 231,000 of them — need repairs. some are physical safety risks or preservation work. one in five miles of our highways and major roads are in poor condition. that’s 186,000 miles of highway. aviation: 20 percent of all flights — 20 percent of all flights weren’t on time, resulting in 1.5 million hours lost in production. six to ten million homes in america still have lead pipes servicing their water lines. we have over 100,000 wellheads that are not capped, leaking methane. what are we doing? and, by the way, we can put as many pipefitters and miners and — to work capping those wells at the same price that they would charge to dig those wells. so, i — i just find it frustrated — frustrating to talk about. last point i’ll make on the infrastructure — and i apologize for spending more time on it, but — is that if you think about it, it’s the place where we will be able to significantly increase american productivity, at the same time providing really good jobs for people. but we can’t build back to what they used to be. we have to build — the environment has — global warming has already done significant damage. the roads that used to be above the water level — didn’t have to worry about where the drainage ditch was — now you got to rebuild them three feet higher. because it’s not going to go back to what it was before; it will only get worse, unless we stop it. there’s so much we can do. look at all of the schools in america. most of you live in the washington area now. but in your hometowns — i don’t know where you’re all from — how many schools where the kids can’t drink the water out of the fountain? how many schools are still in the position where there’s asbestos? how many schools in america we’re sending our kids to don’t have adequate ventilation? how many homes, buildings, office complexes are wasting billions of barrels of oil over time because they can’t hold in the heat or the air conditioning because it leaks through the windows that are so porous and the connections? it’s amazing. so there’s so much we can do that’s good stuff, makes people healthier, and creates good jobs. and i think that i got one more question here. janet from univision. q thank you, mr. president. we, too, have been reporting at the border. and just like cecilia, we ran into a pair of siblings who came in on monday, who were detained by cbp — had the phone number for their mother who lives in the u.s. we have contacted the mother. that’s the only way they know her kids are here because cbp, today, thursday, has not contacted that mother. so when can we expect your promise of things getting better with contacting and expediency and processing? well, they’re already getting better, but they’re going to get real — they’ll get a whole hell of lot better real quick, or we’re going to hear of some people leaving, okay? we can get this done. we’re going to get it done. i had a long meeting with the entire team and several cabinet-level officers the other night. we’re going to be moving, within the next — within the next week, over 100,000 — i mean, 1,000 people out of the border patrol into safe, secure beds and facilities. we’re going to significantly ramp up. we’re already out there contacting everyone, from getting some of the employees at hhs — and there’s a lot of them doing other things — and move them into making those calls. we’re in a — we’re in the process of rearranging and providing for the personnel needed to get that done. but i admire the fact that you were down there; you’re making the calls yourself. it’s real. the next thing that has to happen though — as you well know has to happen — there have to be some certitude that this is the — actually mom, dad, or whomever. and there’s ways to do that. there’s ways to do that — a little bit like determining whether or not you got the right code for your credit card, you know? “what was your dog’s name?” kind of a thing. i’m being a bit facetious, but not really. and also seeking harder data, from dna to — to birth certificates, which takes longer. so, i want to do this as quickly as humanly possible and as safely as possible. q as you well know, treating the root cau- — causes in latin america doesn’t change things overnight. how do you realistically and physically keep these families from coming to the u.s. when things will not get better in their countries right away? well, i can’t guarantee that. but i know, you know, that old thing: the journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step. you know as well as i do; you cover it: you have serious — it’s not like somebody at a sitting hand-hewn table in guatemala — i mean, in — in somewhere in mexico or in guadalupe, saying, “i got a great idea. let’s sell everything we have. give it to a coyote. have him take our kids across the border and into a desert where they don’t speak the language. won’t that be fun? let’s go.” that’s not how it happens. people don’t want to leave. when my great grandfather got on a coffin ship in the irish sea, expectation was: was he going to live long enough on that ship to get to the united states of america? but they left because of what the brits had been doing. they were in real, real trouble. they didn’t want to leave. but they had no choice. so you got — we can’t — i can’t guarantee we’re going to solve everything, but i can guarantee we can make everything better. we can make it better. we can change the lives of so many people. and the other thing i want to point out to you and i hope you point out: i realize it’s much more heart wrenching — and it is — to deal with a five- and six- and seven-year-old. but you went down there, and you saw: the vast majority of these children — 70 percent — are 16 years old, 17 years old, and mostly males. doesn’t make it — that doesn’t make it good, bad, or indifferent. but the idea that we have tens of thousands of kids in these god-awful facilities that are, really, little babies crying all night — and there’s some; that’s true. that’s why we got to act. and yesterday, i asked my team — both the director of the two agencies, as well as others — i asked them what would they, in fact — and i asked their opinion because they’re the experts — but i said, “focus on the most vulnerable immediately.” but there’s no reason why, in the next month, as people cross the border, that phone call can’t be made in the first 48 hours and begin. q if i may ask one last question: have you had any talks with senate republicans who are threatening this administration with not considering the immigration legislation that was passed in the house until the situation at the border has been resolved? no, because i know they have to posture for a while. they sort of got to get it out of their system. this is a — but i’m ready to work with any republican who wants to help solve the problem and make the situation better. but, folks, i’m going. thank you very, very much. i appreciate it. thank you. good afternoon. i want to speak today to the unfolding situation in afghanistan: the developments that have taken place in the last week and the steps we’re taking to address the rapidly evolving events. my national security team and i have been closely monitoring the situation on the ground in afghanistan and moving quickly to execute the plans we had put in place to respond to every constituency, including—and contingency—including the rapid collapse we’re seeing now. i’ll speak more in a moment about the specific steps we’re taking, but i want to remind everyone how we got here and what america’s interests are in afghanistan. we went to afghanistan almost 20 years ago with clear goals: get those who attacked us on september 11th, 2001, and make sure al qaeda could not use afghanistan as a base from which to attack us again. we did that. we severely degraded al qaeda in afghanistan. we never gave up the hunt for osama bin laden, and we got him. that was a decade ago. our mission in afghanistan was never supposed to have been nation building. it was never supposed to be creating a unified, centralized democracy. our only vital national interest in afghanistan remains today what it has always been: preventing a terrorist attack on american homeland. i’ve argued for many years that our mission should be narrowly focused on counterterrorism—not counterinsurgency or nation building. that’s why i opposed the surge when it was proposed in 2009 when i was vice president. and that’s why, as president, i am adamant that we focus on the threats we face today in 2021—not yesterday’s threats. today, the terrorist threat has metastasized well beyond afghanistan: al shabaab in somalia, al qaeda in the arabian peninsula, al-nusra in syria, isis attempting to create a caliphate in syria and iraq and establishing affiliates in multiple countries in africa and asia. these threats warrant our attention and our resources. we conduct effective counterterrorism missions against terrorist groups in multiple countries where we don’t have a permanent military presence. if necessary, we will do the same in afghanistan. we’ve developed counterterrorism over-the-horizon capability that will allow us to keep our eyes firmly fixed on any direct threats to the united states in the region and to act quickly and decisively if needed. when i came into office, i inherited a deal that president trump negotiated with the taliban. under his agreement, u.s. forces would be out of afghanistan by may 1, 2021—just a little over three months after i took office. u.s. forces had already drawn down during the trump administration from roughly 15,500 american forces to 2,500 troops in country, and the taliban was at its strongest militarily since 2001. the choice i had to make, as your president, was either to follow through on that agreement or be prepared to go back to fighting the taliban in the middle of the spring fighting season. there would have been no ceasefire after may 1. there was no agreement protecting our forces after may 1. there was no status quo of stability without american casualties after may 1. there was only the cold reality of either following through on the agreement to withdraw our forces or escalating the conflict and sending thousands more american troops back into combat in afghanistan, lurching into the third decade of conflict. i stand squarely behind my decision. after 20 years, i’ve learned the hard way that there was never a good time to withdraw u.s. forces. that’s why we were still there. we were clear-eyed about the risks. we planned for every contingency. but i always promised the american people that i will be straight with you. the truth is: this did unfold more quickly than we had anticipated. so what’s happened? afghanistan political leaders gave up and fled the country. the afghan military collapsed, sometimes without trying to fight. if anything, the developments of the past week reinforced that ending u.s. military involvement in afghanistan now was the right decision. american troops cannot and should not be fighting in a war and dying in a war that afghan forces are not willing to fight for themselves. we spent over a trillion dollars. we trained and equipped an afghan military force of some 300,000 strong—incredibly well equipped—a force larger in size than the militaries of many of our nato allies. we gave them every tool they could need. we paid their salaries, provided for the maintenance of their air force—something the taliban doesn’t have. taliban does not have an air force. we provided close air support. we gave them every chance to determine their own future. what we could not provide them was the will to fight for that future. there’s some very brave and capable afghan special forces units and soldiers, but if afghanistan is unable to mount any real resistance to the taliban now, there is no chance that 1 year—1 more year, 5 more years, or 20 more years of u.s. military boots on the ground would’ve made any difference. and here’s what i believe to my core: it is wrong to order american troops to step up when afghanistan’s own armed forces would not. if the political leaders of afghanistan were unable to come together for the good of their people, unable to negotiate for the future of their country when the chips were down, they would never have done so while u.s. troops remained in afghanistan bearing the brunt of the fighting for them. and our true strategic competitors—china and russia—would love nothing more than the united states to continue to funnel billions of dollars in resources and attention into stabilizing afghanistan indefinitely. when i hosted president ghani and chairman abdullah at the white house in june and again when i spoke by phone to ghani in july, we had very frank conversations. we talked about how afghanistan should prepare to fight their civil wars after the u.s. military departed, to clean up the corruption in government so the government could function for the afghan people. we talked extensively about the need for afghan leaders to unite politically. they failed to do any of that. i also urged them to engage in diplomacy, to seek a political settlement with the taliban. this advice was flatly refused. mr. ghani insisted the afghan forces would fight, but obviously he was wrong. so i’m left again to ask of those who argue that we should stay: how many more generations of america’s daughters and sons would you have me send to fight afghans—afghanistan’s civil war when afghan troops will not? how many more lives—american lives—is it worth? how many endless rows of headstones at arlington national cemetery? i’m clear on my answer: i will not repeat the mistakes we’ve made in the past—the mistake of staying and fighting indefinitely in a conflict that is not in the national interest of the united states, of doubling down on a civil war in a foreign country, of attempting to remake a country through the endless military deployments of u.s. forces. those are the mistakes we cannot continue to repeat, because we have significant vital interests in the world that we cannot afford to ignore. i also want to acknowledge how painful this is to so many of us. the scenes we’re seeing in afghanistan, they’re gut-wrenching, particularly for our veterans, our diplomats, humanitarian workers, for anyone who has spent time on the ground working to support the afghan people. for those who have lost loved ones in afghanistan and for americans who have fought and served in the country—serve our country in afghanistan—this is deeply, deeply personal. it is for me as well. i’ve worked on these issues as long as anyone. i’ve been throughout afghanistan during this war—while the war was going on—from kabul to kandahar to the kunar valley. i’ve traveled there on four different occasions. i met with the people. i’ve spoken to the leaders. i spent time with our troops. and i came to understand firsthand what was and was not possible in afghanistan. so, now we’re fercus [sic]—focused on what is possible. we will continue to support the afghan people. we will lead with our diplomacy, our international influence, and our humanitarian aid. we’ll continue to push for regional diplomacy and engagement to prevent violence and instability. we’ll continue to speak out for the basic rights of the afghan people—of women and girls—just as we speak out all over the world. i have been clear that human rights must be the center of our foreign policy, not the periphery. but the way to do it is not through endless military deployments; it’s with our diplomacy, our economic tools, and rallying the world to join us. now, let me lay out the current mission in afghanistan. i was asked to authorize—and i did—6,000 u.s. troops to deploy to afghanistan for the purpose of assisting in the departure of u.s. and allied civilian personnel from afghanistan, and to evacuate our afghan allies and vulnerable afghans to safety outside of afghanistan. our troops are working to secure the airfield and to ensure continued operation of both the civilian and military flights. we’re taking over air traffic control. we have safely shut down our embassy and transferred our diplomats. our dip-—our diplomatic presence is now consolidated at the airport as well. over the coming days, we intend to transport out thousands of american citizens who have been living and working in afghanistan. we’ll also continue to support the safe departure of civilian personnel—the civilian personnel of our allies who are still serving in afghanistan. operation allies refugee [refuge], which i announced back in july, has already moved 2,000 afghans who are eligible for special immigration visas and their families to the united states. in the coming days, the u.s. military will provide assistance to move more siv-eligible afghans and their families out of afghanistan. we’re also expanding refugee access to cover other vulnerable afghans who worked for our embassy: u.s. non-governmental agencies—or the u.s. non-governmental organizations; and afghans who otherwise are at great risk; and u.s. news agencies. i know that there are concerns about why we did not begin evacuating afghans—civilians sooner. part of the answer is some of the afghans did not want to leave earlier—still hopeful for their country. and part of it was because the afghan government and its supporters discouraged us from organizing a mass exodus to avoid triggering, as they said, “a crisis of confidence.” american troops are performing this mission as professionally and as effectively as they always do, but it is not without risks. as we carry out this departure, we have made it clear to the taliban: if they attack our personnel or disrupt our operation, the u.s. presence will be swift and the response will be swift and forceful. we will defend our people with devastating force if necessary. our current military mission will be short in time, limited in scope, and focused in its objectives: get our people and our allies to safety as quickly as possible. and once we have completed this mission, we will conclude our military withdrawal. we will end america’s longest war after 20 long years of bloodshed. the events we’re seeing now are sadly proof that no amount of military force would ever deliver a stable, united, and secure afghanistan—as known in history as the “graveyard of empires.” what is happening now could just as easily have happened 5 years ago or 15 years in the future. we have to be honest: our mission in afghanistan has taken many missteps—made many missteps over the past two decades. i’m now the fourth american president to preside over war in afghanistan—two democrats and two republicans. i will not pass this responsibly on—responsibility on to a fifth president. i will not mislead the american people by claiming that just a little more time in afghanistan will make all the difference. nor will i shrink from my share of responsibility for where we are today and how we must move forward from here. i am president of the united states of america, and the buck stops with me. i am deeply saddened by the facts we now face. but i do not regret my decision to end america’s warfighting in afghanistan and maintain a laser-focus on our counterterrorism missions there and in other parts of the world. our mission to degrade the terrorist threat of al qaeda in afghanistan and kill osama bin laden was a success. our decades-long effort to overcome centuries of history and permanently change and remake afghanistan was not, and i wrote and believed it never could be. i cannot and i will not ask our troops to fight on endlessly in another—in another country’s civil war, taking casualties, suffering life-shattering injuries, leaving families broken by grief and loss. this is not in our national security interest. it is not what the american people want. it is not what our troops, who have sacrificed so much over the past two decades, deserve. i made a commitment to the american people when i ran for president that i would bring america’s military involvement in afghanistan to an end. and while it’s been hard and messy—and yes, far from perfect—i’ve honored that commitment. more importantly, i made a commitment to the brave men and women who serve this nation that i wasn’t going to ask them to continue to risk their lives in a military action that should have ended long ago. our leaders did that in vietnam when i got here as a young man. i will not do it in afghanistan. i know my decision will be criticized, but i would rather take all that criticism than pass this decision on to another president of the united states—yet another one—a fifth one. because it’s the right one—it’s the right decision for our people. the right one for our brave service members who have risked their lives serving our nation. and it’s the right one for america. so, thank you. may god protect our troops, our diplomats, and all of the brave americans serving in harm’s way. hello, folks. (the president checks his watch.) just checking it’s afternoon. (laughter.)good afternoon. before i begin my remarks, i just wanted to say a few words about what happened yesterday in new york city.the american principle that no one is above the law was reaffirmed.donald trump was given every opportunity to defend himself.it was a state case, not a federal case. and it was heard by a jury of 12 citizens—12 americans, 12 people like you. like millions of americans who served on juries, this jury was chosen the same way every jury in america is chosen. it was a process that donald trump’s attorney was part of.the jury heard five weeks of evidence—five weeks. and after careful deliberation, the jury reached a unanimous verdict. they found donald trump guilty on all 34 felony counts. now he’ll be given the opportunity, as he should, to appeal that decision just like everyone else has that opportunity.that’s how the american system of justice works.and it’s reckless, it’s dangerous, and it’s irresponsible for anyone to say this was rigged just because they don’t like the verdict.our justice system has endured for nearly 250 years, and it literally is the cornerstone of america—our justice system.the justice system should be respected, and we should never allow anyone to tear it down. it’s as simple as that.that’s america. that’s who we are. and that’s who we’ll always be, god willing.now to another issue. i want to give an update on my efforts to end the crisis in gaza.for the past several months, my negotiators of foreign policy, intelligence community, and the like have been relentlessly focused not just on a ceasefire that would inevitably be fragile and temporary but on a durable end to the war. that’s been the focus: a durable end to this war.one that brings all the hostages home, ensures israel’s security, creates a better “day after” in gaza without hamas in power, and sets the stage for a political settlement that provides a better future for israelis and palestinians alike.now, after intensive diplomacy carried out by my team and my many conversations with leaders of israel, qatar, and egypt and other middle eastern countries, israel has now offered—israel has offered a comprehensive new proposal.it’s a roadmap to an enduring ceasefire and the release of all hostages.this proposal has been transmitted by qatar to hamas.today, i want to lay out its terms for the american citizens and for the world.this new proposal has three phases—three.the first phase would last for six weeks. here’s what it would include: a full and complete ceasefire; a withdrawal of israeli forces from all populated areas of gaza; a release of a number of hostages—including women, the elderly, the wounded—in exchange for the release of hundreds of palestinian prisoners. there are american hostages who would be released at this stage, and we want them home.additional, some remains of hostages who have been killed would be returned to their families, bringing some degree of closure to their terrible grief.palestinians—civilians—would return to their homes and neighborhoods in all areas of gaza, including in the north.humanitarian assistance would surge with 600 trucks carrying aid into gaza every single day.with a ceasefire, that aid could be safely and effectively distributed to all who need it. hundreds of thousands of temporary shelters, including housing units, would be delivered by the international community.all of that and more would begin immediately—immediately.during the six weeks of phase one, israel and hamas would negotiate the necessary arrangements to get to phase two, which is a permanent end to hostilities.now, i’ll be straight with you. there are a number of details to negotiate to move from phase one to phase two. israel will want to make sure its interests are protected.but the proposal says if the negotiations take longer than six weeks for phase one, the ceasefire will still continue as long as negotiations continue.and the united states, egypt, and qatar would work to ensure negotiations keep going—all agreements—all agreements—until all the agreements are reached and phase two is able to begin.then phase two: there would be an exchange for the release of all remaining living hostages, including male soldiers; israeli forces would withdraw from gaza; and as long as hamas lives up to its commitments, a temporary ceasefire would become, in the words of the israeli proposal, “the cessation of hostilities permanently,” end of quote. “cessation of hostilities permanently.”finally, in phase three, a major reconstruction plan for gaza would commence. and any final remains of hostages who have been killed would be returned to their families.that’s the offer that’s now on the table and what we’ve been asking for. it’s what we need.the people of israel should know they can make this offer without any further risk to their own security because they’ve devastated hamas forces over the past eight months. at this point, hamas no longer is capable of carrying out another october 7th, which—one of the israelis’ main objective in this war and, quite frankly, a righteous one.i know there are those in israel who will not agree with this plan and will call for the war to continue indefinitely. some are even in the government coalition. and they’ve made it clear: they want to occupy gaza, they want to keep fighting for years, and the hostages are not a priority to them.well, i’ve urged the leadership in israel to stand behind this deal, despite whatever pressure comes.and to the people of israel, let me say this. as someone whose had a lifelong commitment to israel, as the only american president who has ever gone to israel in a time of war, as someone who just sent the u.s. forces to directly defend israel when it was attacked by iran, i ask you to take a step back and think what will happen if this moment is lost.we can’t lose this moment. indefinite war in pursuit of an unidentified notion of “total victory” will not bring israel in—will not bring down—bog down—will only bog down israel in gaza, draining the economic, military, and human resources, and furthering israel’s isolation in the world.that will not bring hostages home. that will not bring an enduring defeat of hamas. that will not bring israel lasting security.but a comprehensive approach that starts with this deal will bring hostages home and will lead to a more secure israel. and once a ceasefire and hostage deal is concluded, it unlocks the possibility of a great deal more progress, including calm along israel’s northern border with lebanon.the united states will help forge a diplomatic resolution, one that ensures israel’s security and allows people to safely return to their homes without fear of being attacked.with a deal, a rebuilding of gaza will begin [with] arab nations and the international community, along with palestinian and israeli leaders, to get it done in a manner that does not allow hamas to re-arm.and the united states will work with our partners to rebuild homes, schools, and hospitals in gaza to help repair communities that were destroyed in the chaos of war.and with this deal, israel could become more deeply integrated into the region, including—it’s no surprise to you all—including a potential historic normalization agreement with saudi arabia. israel could be part of a regional security network to counter the threat posed by iran.all of this progress would make israel more secure, with israeli families no longer living in the shadow of a terrorist attack.and all of this would create the conditions for a different future and a better future for the palestinian people, one of self-determination, dignity, security, and freedom. this path is available once the deal is struck.israel will always have the right to defend itself against the threats to its security and to bring those responsible for october 7th to justice. and the united states will always ensure that israel has what it needs to defend itself.if hamas fails to fulfill its commitments under the deal, israel can resume military operations. but egypt and qatar have assured me and they are continuing to work to ensure that hamas doesn’t do that. and the united states will help ensure that israel lives up to their obligations as well.that’s what this deal says. that’s what it says. and we’ll do our part.this is truly a decisive moment. israel has made their proposal. hamas says it wants a ceasefire. this deal is an opportunity to prove whether they really mean it.hamas needs to take the deal.for months, people all over the world have called for a ceasefire. now it’s time to raise your voices and to demand that hamas come to the table, agrees to this deal, and ends this war that they began.of course, there will be differences on the specific details that need to be worked out. that’s natural. if hamas comes to negotiate ready to deal, then israel negotiations must be given a mandate, the necessary flexibility to close that deal.the past eight months have marked heartbreaking pain: pain of those whose loved ones were slaughtered by hamas terrorists on october 7th; hostages and their families waiting in anguish; ordinary israelis whose lives were forever marked by the shattering event of hamas’s sexual violence and ruthless brutality.and the palestinian people have endured sheer hell in this war. too many innocent people have been killed, including thousands of children. far too many have been badly wounded.we all saw the terrible images from the deadly fire in rafah earlier this week following an israeli strike against—targeting hamas. and even as we work to surge assistance to gaza, with 1,800 trucks delivering supplies these last five days—1,800—the humanitarian crisis still remains.i know this is a subject on which people in this country feel deep, passionate convictions. and so do i. this has been one of the hardest, most complicated problems in the world. there’s nothing easy about this—nothing easy about it.through it all, though, the united states has worked relentlessly to support israelis’ security, to get humanitarian supplies into gaza, and to get a ceasefire and a hostage deal to bring this war to an end.yesterday, with this new initiative, we’ve taken an important step in that direction.and i want to level with you today as to where we are and what might be possible. but i need your help. everyone who wants peace now must raise their voices and let the leaders know they should take this deal; work to make it real, make it lasting; and forge a better future out of the tragic terror attack and war.it’s time to begin this new stage, for the hostages to come home, for israel to be secure, for the suffering to stop. it’s time for this war to end and for the day after to begin.thank you very much. my fellow leaders, today is the fourth time i’ve had the great honor of speaking to this assembly as president of the united states. it will be my last.i’ve seen a remarkable sweep of history. i was first elected to office in the united states of america as a u.s. senator in 1972. now, i know i look like i’m only 40. i know that.i was 29 years old. back then, we were living through an inflection point, a moment of tension and uncertainty. the world was divided by the cold war. the middle east was headed toward war. america was at war in vietnam, and at that point, the longest war in america’s history. our country was divided and angry, and there were questions about our staying power and our future. but even then, i entered public life not out of despair but out of optimism. the united states and the world got through that moment. it wasn’t easy or simple or without significant setbacks. but we would go on to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons throughout the — through arms control and then go on to bring the cold war itself to an end. israel and egypt went to war but then forged a historic peace. we ended the war in vietnam. the — last year, in hanoi, i was — met with the vietnamese leadership, and we elevated our partnership to the highest level. it’s a testament to the resilience of the human spirit and the capacity for reconciliation that today the united states and vietnam are partners and friends, and it’s proof that even from the horrors of war there is a way forward. things can get better. we should never forget that. i have seen that throughout my career. in the 1980s, i spoke out against apartheid in south africa, and then i watched the racist regime fall. in the 1990s, i worked to hold milošević accountable for war crimes. he was held accountable.at home, i wrote and passed the violence against women act to end the scourge of violence against women and girls not only in america but across the world, as many of you have as well. but we have so much more to do, especially against rape and sexual violence as weapons of war and terror.we were attacked on 9/11 by al-qaeda and osama bin laden. we brought him justice. then i came to the presidency in another moment in a crisis and uncertainty. i believed america had to look forward. new challenges, new threats, new opportunities were in front of us. we needed to put ourselves in a position to see the threats, to deal with the challenges, and to seize the opportunities as well. we needed to end the era of war that began on 9/11. as vice president to president obama, he asked me to work to wind down the military operations in iraq. and we did, painful as it was. when i came to office as president, afghanistan had replaced vietnam as america’s longest war. i was determined to end it, and i did. it was a hard decision but the right decision. four american presidents had faced that decision, but i was determined not to leave it to the fifth. it was a decision accompanied by tragedy. thirteen brave americans lost their lives along with hundreds of afghans in a suicide bomb. i think those lost lives — i think of them every day.i think of all the 2,461 u.s. military deaths over a long 20 years of that war. 20,744 american servicemen wounded in action. i think of their service, their sacrifice, and their heroism. i know other countries lost their own men and women fighting alongside us. we honor their sacrifices as well.to face the future, i was also determined to rebuild my country’s alliances and partnerships to a level not previously seen. we did — we did just that, from traditional treaty alliances to new partnerships like the quad with the united states, japan, australia, and india. i know — i know many look at the world today and see difficulties and react with despair, but i do not. i won’t. as leaders, we don’t have the luxury. i recognize the challenges from ukraine to gaza to sudan and beyond: war, hunger, terrorism, brutality, record displacement of people, a climate crisis, democracy at risk, strains within our societies, the promise of artificial intelligence and its significant risks. the list goes on. but maybe because of all i’ve seen and all we have done together over the decades, i have hope. i know there is a way forward.in 1919, the irish poet william butler yeats described a world, and i quote, where “things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,” end of quote.some may say those words describe the world not just in 1919 but in 2024. but i see a critical distinction. in our time, the center has held. leaders and people from every region and across the political spectrum have stood together. turned the page — we turned the page on the worst pandemic in a century. we made sure covid no longer controls our lives. we defended the u.n. charter and ensured the survival of ukraine as a free nation. my country made the largest investment in climate and clean energy ever, anywhere in history.there will always be forces that pull our countries apart and the world apart: aggression, extremism, chaos, and cynicism, a desire to retreat from the world and go it alone. our task, our test is to make sure that the forces holding us together are stronger than those that are pulling us apart, that the principles of partnership that we came here each year to uphold can withstand the challenges, that the center holds once again.my fellow leaders, i truly believe we are at another inflection point in world history where the choices we make today will determine our future for decades to come. will we stand behind the principles that unite us? we stand firm against aggression. we — will we end the conflicts that are raging today? will we take on global challenges like climate change, hunger, and disease? will we plan now for the opportunities and risk of a revolutionary new technologies?i want to talk today about each of those decisions and the actions, in my view, we must take.to start, each of us in this body has made a commitment to the principles of the u.n. charter, to stand up against aggression. when russia invaded ukraine, we could have stood by and merely protested. but vice president harris and i understood that that was an assault on everything this institution is supposed to stand for. and so, at my direction, america stepped into the breach, providing massive security and economic and humanitarian assistance. our nato allies and partners in 50-plus nations stood up as well. but most importantly, the ukrainian people stood up. and i ask the people of this chamber to stand up for them.the good news is putin’s war has failed at his core aim. he set out to destroy ukraine, but ukraine is still free. he set out to weaken nato, but nato is bigger, stronger, and more united than ever before with two new members, finland and sweden. but we cannot let up.the world now has another choice to make: will we sustain our support to help ukraine win this war and preserve its freedom or walk away and let aggression be renewed and a nation be destroyed?i know my answer. we cannot grow weary. we cannot look away. and we will not let up on our support for ukraine, not until ukraine wins a just and durable peace [based] on the u.n. charter.we also need to uphold our principles as we seek to responsibly manage the competition with china so it does not veer into conflict. we stand ready to cooperate on urgent challenges for the good of our people and the people everywhere.we recently resumed cooperation with china to stop the flow of deadly synthetic narcotics. i appreciate the collaboration. it matters for the people in my country and many others around the world.on matters of conviction, the united states is unabashed, pushing back against unfair economic competition and against military coercion of other nations in the south china sea, in maintaining peace and stability across the taiwan straits, in protecting our most advanced technologies so they cannot be used against us or any of our partners. at the same time, we’re going to continue to strengthen our network of alliances and partnerships across the indo-pacific. these partnerships are not against any nation. they are building blocks for a free, open, secure, and peaceful indo-pacific.we are also working to bring a greater measure of peace and stability to the middle east. the world must not flinch from the horrors of october 7th. any country — any country would have the right and responsibility to ensure that such an attack can never happen again. thousands of armed hamas terrorists invaded a sovereign state, slaughtering and massacring more than 1,200 people, including 46 americans, in their homes and at a music festival; despicable acts of sexual violence; 250 innocents taken hostage. i’ve met with the families of those hostages. i’ve grieved with them. they’re going through hell. innocent civilians in gaza are also going through hell. thousands and thousands killed, including aid workers. too many families dislocated, crowding into tents, facing a dire humanitarian situation. they didn’t ask for this war that hamas started. i put forward with qatar and egypt a ceasefire and hostage deal. it’s been endorsed by the u.n. security council. now is the time for the parties to finalize its terms, bring the hostages home, secure security for israel, and gaza free of hamas’ grip, ease the suffering in gaza, and end this war.on october 7th — (applause) — since october 7, we have also been determined to prevent a wider war that engulfs the entire region. hezbollah, unprovoked, joined the october 7th attack launching rockets into israel. almost a year later, too many on each side of the israeli-lebanon border remain displaced. full-scale war is not in anyone’s interest. even as the situation has escalated, a diplomatic solution is still possible. in fact, it remains the only path to lasting security to allow the residents from both countries to return to their homes on the border safely. and that’s what working — that’s what we’re working tirelessly to achieve.as we look ahead, we must also address the rise of violence against innocent palestinians on the west bank and set the conditions for a better future, including a two-state solution, where the world — where israel enjoys security and peace and full recognition and normalized relations with all its neighbors, where palestinians live in security, dignity, and self-determination in a state of their own. (applause.)progress toward peace will put us in a stronger position to deal with the ongoing threat posed by iran. together, we must deny oxygen to terrorists — to its terrorist proxies, which have called for more october 7ths, and ensure that iran will never, ever obtain a nuclear weapon.gaza is not the only conflict that deserves our outrage. in sudan, a bloody civil war unleashed one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises: eight million — eight million on the brink of famine, hundreds of thousands already there, atrocities in darfur and elsewhere. the united states has led the world in providing humanitarian aid to sudan. and with our partners, we have led diplomatic talks to try to silence the guns and avert a wider famine. the world needs to stop arming the generals, to speak with one voice and tell them: stop tearing your country apart. stop blocking aid to the sudanese people. end this war now.but people need more than the absence of war. they need the chance — the chance to live in dignity. they need to be protected from the ravages of climate change, hunger, and disease. our administration has invested over $150 billion to make progress and other sustainable development goals. it includes $20 billion for food security and over $50 billion for global health. we’ve mobilized billions more in private-sector investment. we’ve taken the most ambitious climate actions in history. we’ve moved to rejoin the paris agreement on day one. and today, my country is finally on track to cut emissions in half by 2030, on track to honor my pledge to quadruple climate financing to developing nations with $11 billion thus far this year. we’ve rejoined the world health organization and donated nearly 700 million doses of covid vaccine to 117 countries. we must now move quickly to face mpox outbreak in africa. we are prepared to commit $500 million to help african countries prevent and respond to mpox and to donate 1 million doses of mpox vaccine now. we call on our partners to match our pledge and make this a billion-dollar commitment to the people of africa. beyond the core necessities of food and health, the united states, the g7, and our partners have embarked on an ambitious initiative to mobilize and deliver significant financing to the developing world. we are working to help countries build out their infrastructure, to clean energy transition, to their digital transformation to lay new economic foundations for a prosperous future. it’s called the partnership for global infrastructure and investment. we’ve already starting to see the fruits of this emerge in southern africa and in southeast asia and in the americas. we have to keep it going. i want to get things done together. in order to do that, we must build a stronger, more effective, and more inclusive united nations. the u.n. needs to adapt to bring in new voices and new perspectives. that’s why we support reforming and expanding the membership of the u.n. security council.my u.n. ambassador just laid out our detailed vision to reflect today’s world, not yesterday’s. it’s time to move forward. and the security council, like the u.n. itself, needs to get back to the job of making peace; of brokering deals to end wars and suffering; and to stop the spread of the most dangerous weapons; of stabilizing troubled regions in east africa — from east africa to haiti, to kenya-led mission that’s working alongside the haitian people to turn the tide.we also have a responsibility to prepare our citizens for the future. we’ll see more technological change, i argue, in the next 2 to 10 years than we have in the last 50 years.artificial intelligence is going to change our ways of life, our ways of work, and our ways of war. it could usher in scientific progress at a pace never seen before. and much of it could make our lives better. but ai also brings profound risks, from deepfakes to disinformation to novel pathogens to bioweapons. we have worked at home and abroad to define the new norms and standards. this year, we achieved the first-ever general assembly resolution on ai to start developing global rules of the road. we also announced a declaration of the responsible use of ai, joined by 60 countries in this chamber.but let’s be honest. this is just the tip of the iceberg of what we need to do to manage this new technology. nothing is certain about how ai will evolve or how it will be deployed. no one knows all the answers.but my fellow leaders, it’s with humility i offer two questions. first: how do we as an international community govern ai? as countries and companies race to uncertain frontiers, we need an equally urgent effort to ensure ai’s safety, security, and trustworthiness. as ai grows more powerful, it also must grow more responsive to our collective needs and values. the benefits of all must be shared equitably. it should be harnessed to narrow, not deepen, digital divides.second: will we ensure that ai supports, rather than undermines, the core principles that human life has value and all humans deserve dignity? we must make certain that the awesome capabilities of ai will be used to uplift and empower everyday people, not to give dictators more powerful shackles on the human spirit. in the years ahead, there may well be no greater test of our leadership than how we deal with ai. let me close with this. even as we navigate so much change, one thing must not change: we must never forget who we’re here to represent. “we the people.” these are the first words of our constitution, the very idea of america. and they inspired the opening words of the u.n. charter. i’ve made the preservation of democracy the central cause of my presidency. this summer, i faced a decision whether to seek a second term as president. it was a difficult decision. being president has been the honor of my life. there is so much more i want to get done. but as much as i love the job, i love my country more. i decided, after 50 years of public service, it’s time for a new generation of leadership to take my nation forward. my fellow leaders, let us never forget, some things are more important than staying in power. it’s your people — (applause) — it’s your people that matter the most. never forget, we are here to serve the people, not the other way around. because the future will be won by those who unleash the full potential of their people to breathe free, to think freely, to innovate, to educate, to live and love openly without fear. that’s the soul of democracy. it does not belong to any one country. i’ve seen it all around the world in the brave men and women who ended apartheid, brought down the berlin wall, fight today for freedom and justice and dignity. we saw it — that universal yearning for rights and freedom — in venezuela, where millions cast their vote for change. it hasn’t been recognized, but it can’t be denied. the world knows the truth. we saw it in uganda lgbt activists demanding safety and recognition of their common humanity. we see it in citizens across the world peacefully choosing their future — from ghana to india to south korea, nations representing one quarter of humanity who will hold elections this year alone. it’s remarkable, the power of “we the people,” that makes me more optimistic about the future than i’ve ever been since i was first elected to the united states senate in 1972.every age faces its challenges. i saw it as a young man. i see it today. but we are stronger than we think. we’re stronger together than alone. and what the people call “impossible” is just an illusion. nelson mandela taught us, and i quote, “it always seems impossible until it’s done.” “it always seems impossible until it’s done.”my fellow leaders, there is nothing that’s beyond our capacity if we work together. let’s work together.god bless you all. and may god protect all those who seek peace. thank you. (applause.) Transcript
Thank you. 
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, my fellow leaders, in the last year, our world has experienced great upheaval: a growing crisis in food insecurity; record heat, floods, and droughts; COVID-19; inflation; and a brutal, needless war—a war chosen by one man, to be very blunt. 
Let us speak plainly. A permanent member of the United Nations Security Council invaded its neighbor, attempted to erase a sovereign state from the map. 
Russia has shamelessly violated the core tenets of the United Nations Charter—no more important than the clear prohibition against countries taking the territory of their neighbor by force. 
Again, just today, President Putin has made overt nuclear threats against Europe and a reckless disregard for the responsibilities of the non-proliferation regime. 
Now Russia is calling—calling up more soldiers to join the fight. And the Kremlin is organizing a sham referenda to try to annex parts of Ukraine, an extremely significant violation of the U.N. Charter. 
This world should see these outrageous acts for what they are. Putin claims he had to act because Russia was threatened. But no one threatened Russia, and no one other than Russia sought conflict. 
In fact, we warned it was coming. And with many of you, we worked to try to avert it.
Putin’s own words make his true purpose unmistakable. Just before he invaded, Putin asserted—and I quote—Ukraine was “created by Russia” and never had, quote, “real statehood.”
And now we see attacks on schools, railway stations, hospitals, wa-—on centers of Ukrainian history and culture. 
In the past, even more horrifying evidence of Russia’s atrocity and war crimes: mass graves uncovered in Izyum; bodies, according to those that excavated those bodies, showing signs of torture. 
This war is about extinguishing Ukraine’s right to exist as a state, plain and simple, and Ukraine’s right to exist as a people. Whoever you are, wherever you live, whatever you believe, that should not—that should make your blood run cold.
That’s why 141 nations in the General Assembly came together to unequivocally condemn Russia’s war against Ukraine. The United States has marshaled massive levels of security assistance and humanitarian aid and direct economic support for Ukraine—more than $25 billion to date. 
Our allies and partners around the world have stepped up as well. And today, more than 40 countries represented in here have contributed billions of their own money and equipment to help Ukraine defend itself. 
The United States is also working closely with our allies and partners to impose costs on Russia, to deter attacks against NATO territory, to hold Russia accountable for the atrocities and war crimes.
Because if nations can pursue their imperial ambitions without consequences, then we put at risk everything this very institution stands for. Everything.
Every victory won on the battlefield belongs to the courageous Ukrainian soldiers. But this past year, the world was tested as well, and we did not hesitate. 
We chose liberty. We chose sovereignty. We chose principles to which every party to the United Nations Charter is beholding. We stood with Ukraine.
Like you, the United States wants this war to end on just terms, on terms we all signed up for: that you cannot seize a nation’s territory by force. The only country standing in the way of that is Russia. 
So, we—each of us in this body who is determined to uphold the principles and beliefs we pledge to defend as members of the United Nations—must be clear, firm, and unwavering in our resolve. 
Ukraine has the same rights that belong to every sovereign nation. We will stand in solidarity with Ukraine. We will stand in solidarity against Russia’s aggression. Period.
Now, it’s no secret that in the contest between democracy and autocracy, the United States—and I, as President—champion a vision for our world that is grounded in the values of democracy. 
The United States is determined to defend and strengthen democracy at home and around the world. Because I believe democracy remains humanity’s greatest instrument to address the challenges of our time. 
We’re working with the G7 and likeminded countries to prove democracies can deliver for their citizens but also deliver for the rest of the world as well. 
But as we meet today, the U.N. Charter—the U.N. Charter’s very basis of a stable and just rule-based order is under attack by those who wish to tear it down or distort it for their own political advantage. 
And the United Nations Charter was not only signed by democracies of the world, it was negotiated among citizens of dozens of nations with vastly different histories and ideologies, united in their commitment to work for peace. 
As President Truman said in 1945, the U.N. Charter—and I quote—is “proof that nations, like men, can state their differences, can face them, and then can find common ground on which to stand.” End of quote.
That common ground was so straightforward, so basic that, today, 193 of you—193 member states—have willingly embraced its principles. And standing up for those principles for the U.N. Charter is the job of every responsible member state. 
I reject the use of violence and war to conquer nations or expand borders through bloodshed.
To stand against global politics of fear and coercion; to defend the sovereign rights of smaller nations as equal to those of larger ones; to embrace basic principles like freedom of navigation, respect for international law, and arms control—no matter what else we may disagree on, that is the common ground upon which we must stand. 
If you’re still committed to a strong foundation for the good of every nation around the world, then the United States wants to work with you. 
I also believe the time has come for this institution to become more inclusive so that it can better respond to the needs of today’s world.
Members of the U.N. Security Council, including the United States, should consistently uphold and defend the U.N. Charter and refrain—refrain from the use of the veto, except in rare, extraordinary situations, to ensure that the Council remains credible and effective.
That is also why the United States supports increasing the number of both permanent and non-permanent representatives of the Council. This includes permanent seats for those nations we’ve long supported and permanent seats for countries in Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean.
The United States is committed to this vital work. In every region, we pursued new, constructive ways to work with partners to advance shared interests, from elevating the Quad in the Indo-Pacific; to signing the Los Angeles Declaration of Migration and Protection at the Summit of the Americas; to joining a historic meeting of nine Arab leaders to work toward a more peaceful, integrated Middle East; to hosting the U.S.-Africa Leaders’ Summit in—this December.
As I said last year, the United States is opening an era of relentless diplomacy to address the challenges that matter most to people’s lives—all people’s lives: tackling the climate crisis, as the previous speaker spoke to; strengthening global health security; feeding the world—feeding the world.
We made that priority. And one year later, we’re keeping that promise.
From the day I came to office, we’ve led with a bold climate agenda. We rejoined the Paris Agreement, convened major climate summits, helped deliver critical agreements on COP26. And we helped get two thirds of the world GDP on track to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. 
And now I’ve signed a historic piece of legislation here in the United States that includes the biggest, most important climate commitment we have ever made in the history of our country: $369 billion toward climate change. That includes tens of billions in new investments in offshore wind and solar, doubling down on zero emission vehicles, increasing energy efficiency, supporting clean manufacturing.
Our Department of Energy estimates that this new law will reduce U.S. emissions by one gigaton a year by 2030 while unleashing a new era of clean-energy-powered economic growth.
Our investments will also help reduce the cost of developing clean energy technologies worldwide, not just the United States. This is a global gamechanger—and none too soon. We don’t have much time.
We all know we’re already living in a climate crisis. No one seems to doubt it after this past year. As we meet, much of Pakistan is still underwater; it needs help. Meanwhile, the Horn of Africa faces unprecedented drought. 
Families are facing impossible choices, choosing which child to feed and wondering whether they’ll survive.
This is the human cost of climate change. And it’s growing, not lessening.
So, as I announced last year, to meet our global responsibility, my administration is working with our Congress to deliver more than $11 billion a year to international climate finance to help lower-income countries implement their climate goals and ensure a just energy transition.
The key part of that will be our PREPARE plan, which will help half a billion people, and especially vulnerable countries, adapt to the impacts of climate change and build resilience.
This need is enormous. So let this be the moment we find within ourselves the will to turn back the tide of climate devastation and unlock a resilient, sustainable, clean energy economy to preserve our planet.
On global health, we’ve delivered more than 620 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine to 116 countries around the world, with more available to help meet countries’ needs—all free of charge, no strings attached.
And we’re working closely with the G20 and other countries. And the United States helped lead the change to establish a groundbreaking new Fund for Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness, and Response at the World Bank.
At the same time, we’ve continued to advance the ball on enduring global health challenges.
Later today, I’ll host the Seventh Replenishment Conference for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria. With bipartisan support in our Congress, I have pledged to contribute up to $6 billion to that effort.
So I look forward to welcoming a historic round of pledges at the conference resulting in one of the largest global health fundraisers ever held in all of history.
We’re also taking on the food crisis head on. With as many as 193 million people around the world experiencing acute—acute food insecurity—a jump of 40 million in a year—today I’m announcing another $2.9 billion in U.S. support for lifesaving humanitarian and food security assistance for this year alone.
Russia, in the meantime, is pumping out lies, trying to pin the blame for the crisis—the food crisis—onto sanctions imposed by many in the world for the aggression against Ukraine. 
So let me be perfectly clear about something: Our sanctions explicitly allow—explicitly allow Russia the ability to export food and fertilizer. No limitation. It’s Russia’s war that is worsening food insecurity, and only Russia can end it.
I’m grateful for the work here at the U.N.—including your leadership, Mr. Secretary-General—establishing a mechanism to export grain from Black Sea ports in Ukraine that Russia had blocked for months, and we need to make sure it’s extended.
We believe strongly in the need to feed the world. That’s why the United States is the world’s largest supporter of the World Food Programme, with more than 40 percent of its budget.
We’re leading support—we’re leading support of the UNICEF efforts to feed children around the world. 
And to take on the larger challenge of food insecurity, the United States introduced a Call to Action: a roadmap eliminating global food insecurity—to eliminating global food insecurity that more than 100 nation member states have already supported.
In June, the G7 announced more than $4.5 billion to strengthen food security around the world.
Through USAID’s Feed the Future initiative, the United States is scaling up innovative ways to get drought- and heat-resistant seeds into the hands of farmers who need them, while distributing fertilizer and improving fertilizer efficiency so that farmers can grow more while using less.
And we’re calling on all countries to refrain from banning food exports or hoarding grain while so many people are suffering. Because in every country in the world, no matter what else divides us, if parents cannot feed their children, nothing—nothing else matters if parents cannot feed their children.
As we look to the future, we’re working with our partners to update and create rules of the road for new challenges we face in the 21st century.
We launched the Trade and Technology Council with the European Union to ensure that key technologies—key technologies are developed and governed in the way that benefits everyone. 
With our partner countries and through the U.N., we’re supporting and strengthening the norms of responsibility—responsible state behavior in cyberspace and working to hold accountable those who use cyberattacks to threaten international peace and security. 
With partners in the Americas, Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, and the Indo-Pacific, we’re working to build a new economic ecosystem while—where every nation—every nation gets a fair shot and economic growth is resilient, sustainable, and shared. 
That’s why the United States has championed a global minimum tax. And we will work to see it implemented so major corporations pay their fair share everywhere—everywhere.
It’s also been the idea behind the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework, which the United States launched this year with 13 other Indo-Pacific economies. We’re working with our partners in ASEAN and the Pacific Islands to support a vision for a critical Indo-Pacific region that is free and open, connected and prosperous, secure and resilient.
Together with partners around the world, we’re working to secure resilient supply chains that protect everyone from coercion or domination and ensure that no country can use energy as a weapon.
And as Russia’s war rolls the global economy, we’re also calling on major global creditors, including the non-Paris Club countries, to transparently negotiate debt forgiveness for lower-income countries to forestall broader economic and political crises around the world. 
Instead of infrastructure projects that generate huge and large debt without delivering on the promised advantages, let’s meet the enormous infrastructure needs around the world with transparent investments—high-standard projects that protect the rights of workers and the environment—keyed to the needs of the communities they serve, not to the contributor.
That’s why the United States, together with fellow G7 partners, launched a Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment. We intend to collectively mobilize $600 billion in investment through this partnership by 2027. 
Dozens of projects are already underway: industrial-scale vaccine manufacturing in Senegal, transformative solar projects in Angola, first-of-its-kind small modular nuclear power plant in Romania.
These are investments that are going to deliver returns not just for those countries, but for everyone. The United States will work with every nation, including our competitors, to solve global problems like climate change. Climate diplomacy is not a favor to the United States or any other nation, and walking away hurts the entire world.
Let me be direct about the competition between the United States and China. As we manage shifting geopolitical trends, the United States will conduct itself as a reasonable leader. We do not seek conflict. We do not seek a Cold War. We do not ask any nation to choose between the United States or any other partner. 
But the United States will be unabashed in promoting our vision of a free, open, secure, and prosperous world and what we have to offer communities of nations: investments that are designed not to foster dependency, but to alleviate burdens and help nations become self-sufficient; partnerships not to create political obligation, but because we know our own success—each of our success is increased when other nations succeed as well.
When individuals have the chance to live in dignity and develop their talents, everyone benefits. Critical to that is living up to the highest goals of this institution: increasing peace and security for everyone, everywhere. 
The United States will not waver in our unrelenting determination to counter and thwart the continuing terrorist threats to our world. And we will lead with our diplomacy to strive for peaceful resolution of conflicts. 
We seek to uphold peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits. 
We remain committed to our One China policy, which has helped prevent conflict for four decades. And we continue to oppose unilateral changes in the status quo by either side. 
We support an African Union-led peace process to end the fight in Ethiopia and restore security for all its people. 
In Venezuela, where years of the political oppression have driven more than 6 million people from that country, we urge a Venezuelan-led dialogue and a return to free and fair elections.
We continue to stand with our neighbor in Haiti as it faces political-fueled gang violence and an enormous human crisis.
And we call on the world to do the same. We have more to do. 
We’ll continue to back the U.N.-mediated truce in Yemen, which has delivered precious months of peace to people that have suffered years of war.
And we will continue to advocate for lasting negotiating peace between the Jewish and democratic state of Israel and the Palestinian people. The United States is committed to Israel’s security, full stop. And a negotiated two-state solution remains, in our view, the best way to ensure Israel’s security and prosperity for the future and give the Palestinians the state which—to which they are entitled—both sides to fully respect the equal rights of their citizens; both people enjoying equal measure of freedom and dignity.
Let me also urge every nation to recommit to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime through diplomacy. No matter what else is happening in the world, the United States is ready to pursue critical arms control measures. A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. 
The five permanent members of the Security Council just reaffirmed that commitment in January. But today, we’re seeing disturbing trends. Russia shunned the Non-Proliferation ideals embraced by every other nation at the 10th NPT Review Conference. 
And again, today, as I said, they’re making irresponsible nuclear threats to use nuclear weapons. China is conducting an unprecedented, concerning nuclear buildup without any transparency. 
Despite our efforts to begin serious and sustained diplomacy, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to blatantly violate U.N. sanctions.
And while the United States is prepared for a mutual return to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action if Iran steps up to its obligations, the United States is clear: We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.
I continue to believe that diplomacy is the best way to achieve this outcome. The nonproliferation regime is one of the greatest successes of this institution. We cannot let the world now slide backwards, nor can we turn a blind eye to the erosion of human rights.
Perhaps singular among this body’s achievements stands the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is the standard by which our forebears challenged us to measure ourselves.
They made clear in 1948: Human rights are the basis for all that we seek to achieve. And yet today, in 2022, fundamental freedoms are at risk in every part of our world, from the violations of—in Xinjiang detailed in recent reports by the Office of U.N.—U.S.—reports detailing by the U.S. [U.N.] High Commissioner, to the horrible abuses against pro-democracy activists and ethnic minorities by the military regime in Burma, to the increased repression of women and girls by the Taliban in Afghanistan.
And today, we stand with the brave citizens and the brave women of Iran who right now are demonstrating to secure their basic rights.
But here’s what I know: The future will be won by those countries that unleash the full potential of their populations, where women and girls can exercise equal rights, including basic reproductive rights, and contribute fully to building a stronger economies and more resilient societies; where religious and ethnic minorities can live their lives without harassment and contribute to the fabric of their communities; where the LGBTQ+ community individuals live and love freely without being targeted with violence; where citizens can question and criticize their leaders without fear of reprisal.
The United States will always promote human rights and the values enshrined in the U.N. Charter in our own country and around the world.
Let me end with this: This institution, guided by the U.N. Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, is at its core an act of dauntless hope.
Let me say that again: It’s an act of dauntless hope.
Think about the vision of those first delegates who undertook a seemingly impossible task while the world was still smoldering.
Think about how divided the people of the world must have felt with the fresh grief of millions dead, the genocidal horrors of the Holocaust exposed.
They had every right to believe only the worst of humanity. Instead, they reached for what was best in all of us, and they strove to build something better: enduring peace; comity among nations; equal rights for every member of the human family; cooperation for the advancement of all humankind.
My fellow leaders, the challenges we face today are great indeed, but our capacity is greater. Our commitment must be greater still.
So let’s stand together to again declare the unmistakable resolve that nations of the world are united still, that we stand for the values of the U.N. Charter, that we still believe by working together we can bend the arc of history toward a freer and more just world for all our children, although none of us have fully achieved it.
We’re not passive witnesses to history; we are the authors of history.
We can do this—we have to do it—for ourselves and for our future, for humankind.
Thank you for your tolerance, for listening to me. I appreciate it very much. God bless you all. 


View Transcriptthank you. (applause.) (inaudible) mike asked me — and i said to bobby, my good friend — he asked me back there — he said, “do you ever get nervous?” and i — he said, “because i got up this morning, made breakfast for my kids. i’ve got to introduce the president.’” and what i say to you, mike: you did a heck of a job. but i’d get nervous if i had to get up in the middle of the night, climb up a telephone pole, replace — in the middle of a storm — a connection that knocked out everybody’s electricity, and put a transformer in. that’s what would make me nervous. so what you did was really good. i couldn’t do what you do, pal. i couldn’t do what you do. and i want to — and it’s true, mike. you’re a union guy; me too. i got in trouble, but i don’t make any apologies for it. i’m a union guy. i support unions. unions built the middle class. it’s about time they start to get a piece of the action. to all my colleagues — (applause) — to the county executives, to the mayor, to everyone who’s here, i want to say: thank you. thank you, congressman, for the passport into your district. and i appreciate being here. i’m honored to be with you. two years ago, i began my campaign here in pittsburgh, saying i was running to rebuild the backbone of america. and today, i return as your president to lay out the vision of how i believe we do that — rebuild the backbone of america. it’s a vision not seen through the eyes of wall street or washington, but through the eyes of hardworking people, like the people i grew up with; people like mike and his union family; union workers in this carpenters training center; people like the folks i grew up with in scranton and claymont, delaware. people who get up every day, work hard, raise their family, pay their taxes, serve their country, and volunteer for their communities, and just looking for a little bit of breathing room — just a little bit of light. ordinary americans doing extraordinary things. the people who break their necks every day for their families and the country they love — a country that, in fact — which, on the day i was elected, was in extreme distress with a virus on a deadly rampage that has now killed four thou- — excuse me, five hundred — i carry it in my pocket every day. i have the list of exactly how many have died: 547,296 americans dead from the virus — more than all the people killed in world war one, world war two, the vietnam war, 9/11. 547,296 americans. and an economy that left millions out of work and created so much anxiety. that’s why i moved so quickly to pass the american rescue plan with the help of my friends here in the congress. i really mean that. it didn’t pass by a whole lot, but with the leadership of conor and bobby and mayor — just — you got it done, because it was an emergency. we needed to act to save jobs, to save businesses, and to save lives. and that’s what we did. we’re beginning to see the results. we’re on our way to having given 200 million vaccination shots in the first 100 days of my presidency. when i said i’d get 100 million done, people thought it was a significant exaggeration. we’re going to get 200 million done — twice the original goal — because of all the help of all of you. leading economists are now predicting our economy will grow 6 percent this year. that’s a rate we haven’t seen in years and years. we can cut child poverty in half this year. with the american rescue plan, we’re meeting immediate emergencies. now it’s time to rebuild. even before the crisis we’re now facing, those at the very top in america were doing very well, which is fine. they were doing great. but everyone else was falling behind. the pandemic only made the division so much worse and more obvious. millions of americans lost their jobs last year while the wealthiest 1 percent of americans saw their net worth increase by $4 trillion. it just goes to show you how distorted and unfair our economy has become. it wasn’t always this way. well, it’s time to change that. i’d note, parenthetically, that i got criticized for giving tax breaks to middle-class and poor folks this last time. i didn’t hear that cry — hue and cry when we were doing the same thing when trump’s tax bill passed and 83 percent of the money went to the top 1 percent. you know, this is not to target those who’ve made it; not to seek retribution. this is about opening opportunities for everybody else. and here’s the truth: we all will do better when we all do well. it’s time to build our economy from the bottom up and from the middle out, not the top down. it hadn’t worked very well. for the economy overall, it hadn’t worked — because wall street didn’t build this country; you, the great middle class, built this country. and unions built the middle class. (applause.) and it’s time — in this time, we’ll rebuild the middle class. we’re going to bring everybody along. regardless of your background, your color, your religion, (inaudible) everybody gets to come along. so, today, i’m proposing a plan for the nation that rewards work, not just rewards wealth. it builds a fair economy that gives everybody a chance to succeed, and it’s going to create the strongest, most resilient, innovative economy in the world. it’s not a plan that tinkers around the edges. it’s a once-in-a generation investment in america, unlike anything we’ve seen or done since we built the interstate highway system and the space race decades ago. in fact, it’s the largest american jobs investment since world war two. it will create millions of jobs, good-paying jobs. it will grow the economy, make us more competitive around the world, promote our national security interests, and put us in a position to win the global competition with china in the upcoming years. is it big? yes. is it bold? yes. and we can get it done. it has two parts: the american jobs plan and the american families plan. both are essential to our economic future. in a few weeks, i’ll talk about the americans family plan, but today i want to talk about the americans jobs plan. i’ll begin with the heart of the plan: it modernizes transportation infrastructure — our roads, our bridges, our airports. i just left your airport. the director of the airport said, “we’re about to renovate the airport.” is that right, mr. county executive? “we’re going to renovate. we’re going to employ thousands of people.” and she looked at me and said, “i can’t thank you enough for this plan.” it grows the economy in key ways. it puts people to work to repair and upgrade so — that we badly need. it makes it easier and more efficient to move goods, to get to work, and to make us more competitive around the world. some of your local officials know, when someone wants to come into the area and a company wants to invest, what do they ask? “where’s the first rail bed? how can i get to the railroad? what access to interstate do i have? what’s the water like? tell me about it.” and it goes on and on. it’s about infrastructure. the american jobs plan will modernize 20,000 miles of highways, roads, and main streets that are in difficult, difficult shape right now. it’ll fix the nation’s 10 most economically significant bridges in america that require replacement. remember that bridge that went down? we got 10 of the most economically significant bridges with more commerce going across it that need to be replaced. we’ll also repair 10,000 bridges, desperately needed upgrades to unclog traffic, keep people safe, and connect our cities, towns, and tribes across the country. the american jobs plan will build new rail corridors and transit lines, easing congestion, cutting pollution, slashing commute times, and opening up investment in communities that can be connected to the cities, and cities to the outskirts, where a lot of jobs are these days. it’ll reduce the bottlenecks of commerce at our ports and our airports. the american jobs plan will lead to a transformational progress in our effort to tackle climate change with american jobs and american ingenuity. it’ll protect our community from billions of dollars of damage from historic super storms, floods, wildfires, droughts, year after year, by making our infrastructure more secure and resilient and seizing incredible opportunities for american workers and american farmers in a clean energy future. skilled workers, like one we just heard from, building a nationwide network of 500,000 charging stations, creating good-paying jobs by leading the world in the manufacturing and export of clean electric cars and trucks. we’re going to provide tax incentives and point-of-sale reberts [sic] — rebates to help all american families afford clean vehicles of the future. the federal government owns an enormous fleet of vehicles which are going to be transitioned to clean electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles right here in the united states, by american workers with american products. when we make all these investments, we’re going to make sure, as the executive order i signed early on, that we buy american. that means investing in american-based companies and american workers. not a contract will go out, that i control, that will not go to a company that is an american company with american products, all the way down the line, and american workers. and we’ll buy the goods we need from all of america, communities that have historically been left out of these investments: black, latino, asian american, native american, rural, small businesses, entrepreneurs across the country. look, today, up to 10 million homes in america and more than 400,000 schools and childcare centers have pipes — where they get their water from — pipes that are lead-based pipes, including pipes for drinking water. according to scientists, there is simply no safe exposure to lead for a child. lead can slow development, cause learning behaviors and hearing problems. the american jobs plan will put plumbers and pipefitters to work, replacing 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines so every american, every child can turn on a faucet or a fountain and drink clean water. with each $5,000 investment replacing a line, that can mean up to $22,000 in healthcare costs saved — a chance to protect our children, help them learn and thrive. we can’t delay. we can’t delay another minute. it’s long past due. you know, in america, where the early interest was in internet — this thing called the internet that we invested — we invented, the early — the early internet was invented here. millions of americans, though, lack access to reliable high-speed internet, including more than 35 percent of rural america. it’s a disparity even more pronounced during this pandemic. american jobs will make sure every single — every single american has access to high quality, affordable, high-speed internet for businesses, for schools. and when i say “affordable,” i mean it. americans pay too much for internet service. we’re going to drive down the price for families who have service now, and make it easier for families who don’t have affordable service to be able to get it now. as you saw in texas and elsewhere, our electric and power — power grids are vulnerable to storms, catastrophic failures, and security lapses, with tragic results. my american jobs plan will put hundreds of thousands of people to work — hundred of thousands of people to work — line workers, electricians, and laborers — laying thousands of miles of transmission line; building a modern, resilient, and fully clean grid; and capping hundreds of thousands of, literally, orphan oil and gas wells that need to be cleaned up because they’re abandoned — paying the same exact rate that a union man or woman would get having dug that well in the first place. we’ll build, upgrade, and weatherize affordable, energy-efficient housing and commercial buildings for millions of americans. even before the pandemic, millions of working families faced enormous — enormous financial and personal strain trying to raise their kids and care for their parents at the same time — the so-called “sandwich generation” — or family members with disability. you got a child at home, you can’t stay home from work to take care of that child unless you lose — you’re going to put the child at risk or you lose your job; or you have an elderly parent you’re taking care of. and seniors and people with disabilities living independently feel that strain as well. but we know, if they can remain independently living, they live longer. the american jobs plan is going to help in big ways. it’s going to extend access to quality, affordable home or community-based care. think of expanded vital services like programs for seniors, or think of homecare workers going into homes of seniors and people with disabilities, cooking meals, helping them get around their homes, and helping them be able to live more independently. for too long, caregivers — who are disproportionately women, and women of color, and immigrants — have been unseen, underpaid, and undervalued. this plan, along with the american families plan, changes that with better wages, benefits, and opportunities for millions of people who will be able to get to work in an economy that works for them. you know, decades ago, the united states government used to spend 2 percent of its gdp — its gross domestic product — on research and development. today, we spend less than 1 percent. i think it’s seven-tenths of 1 percent. here’s why that matters: we’re one of only a few major economies in the world whose public investment in research and development as a share of gdp has declined constantly over the last 25 years. and we’ve fallen back. the rest of the world is closing in and closing in fast. we can’t allow this to continue. the american jobs plan is the biggest increase in our federal non-defense research and development spending on record. it’s going to boost america’s innovative edge in markets where global leadership is up for grabs — markets like battery technology, biotechnology, computer chips, clean energy, the competition with china in particular. critics say we shouldn’t spend this money. they ask, “what do we get out of it?” well, they said the same thing when we first flew into space for the first time. they said the same thing. well, pushing the frontiers led to big benefits back home. when nasa created apollo’s digital flight control system — unheard of at the time — it led to technologies that help us today to drive our cars and fly our planes. when nasa invented ways to keep food safe for the astronauts, it led to programs that have been used to — for decades to keep food safe in supermarkets. at least 2,000 products and services have been developed and commercialized as a result of american space exploration. gps has helped us find each other. computer chips allow us to see and talk to one another, even when we’re separated by mountains and oceans — singing “happy birthday” and watching the first steps of that new baby grandchild; comforting each other when comfort is needed. think about what it means to you and your loved ones. we just have to imagine again. i had a long discussion with xi jinping, the leader of china, when he called to congratulate me. we spent two hours on the phone. and he said — and was astonished by nasa’s security team and the china experts who were on the line — he said, “you’ve always said, mr. president, that you can define america in one word: possibilities.” that’s who we are. in america, anything is possible. like what we did with vaccines a decade ago that laid the foundation for covid-19 vaccines we have today. like we did when the interstate highway system that transformed the way we traveled, lived, worked, and developed. americans could visit relatives anywhere in the country with just a family station wagon. businesses here in pittsburgh could load up a truck and get a product to portland or phoenix. to this day, about a quarter of all the miles americans drive each year on one of those very original highways. imagine what we can do, what’s within our reach, when we modernize those highways. you and your family could travel coast to coast without a single tank of gas onboard a high-speed train. we can connect high-speed, affordable, reliable internet wherever you live. imagine knowing that you’re handing your children and grandchildren a country that will lead the world in producing clean energy technology and will need to address one of the biggest threats of our time. that’s what we’ll do. altogether, along with the american rescue plan, the proposal i put forward will create millions of jobs — estimated by some wall street outfits: over 18 million jobs over four years; good-paying jobs. it also works to level the playing field, empower workers, and ensure that the new jobs are good jobs that you can raise a family on, and ensure free and fair choice to organize and bargain collectively. that’s why my plan asked congress to pass the protecting the right to organize act — the pro act — and send it to my desk. this plan is important, not only for what and how it builds, but it’s also important to where we build. it includes everyone, regardless of your race or your zip code. too often, economic growth and recovery is concentrated on the coast. too often, investments have failed to meet the needs of marginalized communities left behind. there is talent, innovation everywhere. and this plan connects that talent through cities, small towns, rural communities; through our businesses and our universities; through our entrepreneurs, union workers all across america. we have to move now. because i’m convinced that if we act now, in 50 years, people are going to look back and say this was the moment that america won the future. what i’m proposing is a one-time capital investment of roughly $2 trillion in america’s future, spread largely over eight years. it will generate historic job growth, historic economic growth, help businesses to compete internationally, create more revenue as well. they are among the highest-value investments we can make in the nation — investing in our infrastructure. but put it another way, failing to make these investments adds to our debt and effectively puts our children at a disadvantage relative to our competitors. that’s what crumbling infrastructure does. and our infrastructure is crumbling. we’re ranked 13th in the world. what’s more, it heightens our vulnerability to — it attac- — attracts our adversaries to compete in ways that they haven’t up to now. and our adversaries are worried about us building this critical infrastructure. put simply, these are investments we have to make. we can afford to make them — or, put another way, we can’t afford not to. so how do we pay for it? i spoke to the majority leader and — no longer — i guess he’s no longer the majority leader; he has been for a long time. i spoke for the republican — i spoke to the republican leader about the plan. everybody is for doing something on infrastructure. why haven’t we done it? well, no one wants to pay for it. less than four years ago, as i said, the congress passed a tax cut of $2 trillion, increasing the national debt $2 trillion. it didn’t meet virtually any of the predictions it would in terms of growing the economy. overwhelmingly, the benefits of that tax package went to the wealthiest americans. it even included new investments that would profit by shifting profits and jobs overseas if you’re a corporation. it was bad for american competitiveness, deeply unfair to the middle-class families, and wrong for our future. so, here’s what i’d do. i start with one rule: no one — let me say it again — no one making under $400,000 will see their federal taxes go up. period. this is not about penalizing anyone. i have nothing against millionaires and billionaires. i believe american — in american capitalism. i want everyone to do well. but here’s the deal: right now, a middle-class couple — a firefighter and a teacher with two kids — making a combined salary of, say, $110-, $120,000 a year pays 22 cents for each additional dollar they earn in federal income tax. but a multinational corporation that builds a factory abroad — brings it home and then sell it — they pay nothing at all. we’re going to raise the corporate tax. it was 35 percent, which is too high. we all agreed, five years ago, it should go down to 28 percent, but they reduced it to 21 percent. we’re going to raise it back to — up to 28 percent. no one should be able to complain about that. it’s still lower than what that rate was between world war two and 2017. just doing that one thing will generate $1 trillion in additional revenue over 15 years. in 2019, an independent analysis found that are 91 — let me say it again, 91 fortune 500 companies — the biggest companies in the world, including amazon — they used various loopholes so they’d pay not a single solitary penny in federal income tax. i don’t want to punish them, but that’s just wrong. that’s just wrong. a fireman and a teacher paying 22 percent? amazon and 90 other major corporations are paying zero in federal taxes? i’m going to put an end to that, and here’s how we’ll do it. we’re establishing a global minimum tax for u.s. corporations of 21 percent. we’re going to level the international playing field. that alone will raise $1 trillion over 15 years. we’ll also eliminate deductions by corporations for offshoring jobs and shifting assets overseas. you do that, you pay a penalty; you don’t get a reward in my plan. and use the savings from that to give companies tax credits to locate manufacturing here — in manufacturing and production here in the united states. and we’ll significantly ramp up the irs enforcement against corporations who either fail to report their incomes or under-report. it’s estimated that could raise hundreds of billions of dollars. all of this adds up to more than what i’ve proposed to spend in just 15 years. it’s honest. it’s fiscally responsible. and by the way, as the experts will tell you, it reduces the debt — the federal debt over the long haul. but let me be clear: these are my ideas on how to pay for this plan. if others have additional ideas, let them come forward. i’m open to other ideas, so long as they do not impose any tax increase on people making less than $400,000. let me close with this: historically, infrastructure had been a bipartisan undertaking, many times led by republicans. it was abraham lincoln who built the transcontinental railroad. dwight eisenhower, a republican — the interstate highway system. i could go on. and i don’t think you’ll find a republican today in the house or senate — maybe i’m wrong, gentlemen — who doesn’t think we have to improve our infrastructure. they know china and other countries are eating our lunch. so there’s no reason why it can’t be bipartisan again. the divisions of the moment shouldn’t stop us from doing the right thing for the future. i’m going to bring republicans into the oval office; listen to them, what they have to say; and be open to other ideas. we’ll have a good-faith negotiation with any republican who wants to help get this done. but we have to get it done. i truly believe we’re in a moment where history is going to look back on this time as a fundamental choice that had to be made between democracies and autocracies. you know, there’s a lot of autocrats in the world who think the reason why they’re going to win is democracies can’t reach consensus any longer; autocracies do. that’s what competition between america and china and the rest of the world is all about. it’s a basic question: can democracies still deliver for their people? can they get a majority? i believe we can. i believe we must. delivering for the american people is what the american rescue plan was all about. and it’s been overwhelmingly popular. when i wrote it, everybody said i had no bipartisan support. we’re overwhelming bipartisan support with republican — registered republican voters. and ask around. if you live in a town with a republican mayor, a republican county executive, or a republican governor, ask them how many would rather get rid of the plan. ask them if it helped them at all. it’s what the american jobs plan is about — the new one i’m proposing. i hope republicans in congress will join this effort. i hope and i believe a number of businesses will join this effort. and i hope and believe the american people will join this effort — democrats, republican, and independents. we can do this. we have to do this. we will do this. we just have to remember: this is the united states of america. and i’ve said it a thousand times: there’s nothing beyond our capacity if we act together. so it’s time to move together. thank you and i hope i get to come back to see you folks after this plan is passed. and the question is: you have to attract even more apprentices, more people, because we’re building so much. god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you. (applause.) been a tough day. this evening in kabul, as you all know, terrorists attacked—that we’ve been talking about and worried about, that the intelligence community has assessed has [was] undertaken—an attack—by a group known as isis-k—took the lives of american service members standing guard at the airport, and wounded several others seriously. they also wounded a number of civilians, and civilians were killed as well. i’ve been engaged all day and in constant contact with the military commanders here in washington, the pentagon, as well as in afghanistan and doha. and my commanders here in washington and in the field have been on this with great detail, and you’ve had a chance to speak to some, so far. the situation on the ground is still evolving, and i’m constantly being updated. these american service members who gave their lives—it’s an overused word, but it’s totally appropriate—they were heroes. heroes who have been engaged in a dangerous, selfless mission to save the lives of others. they were part of an airlift, an evacuation effort unlike any seen in history, with more than 100,000 american citizens, american partners, afghans who helped us, and others taken to safety in the last 11 days. just in the last 12 hours or so, another 7,000 have gotten out. they were part of the bravest, most capable, and the most selfless military on the face of the earth. and they were part of, simply, what i call the “backbone of america.” they’re the spine of america, the best the country has to offer. jill and i—our hearts ache, like i’m sure all of you do as well, for all those afghan families who have lost loved ones, including small children, or been wounded in this vicious attack. and we’re outraged as well as heartbroken. being the father of an army major who served for a year in iraq and, before that, was in kosovo as a u.s. attorney for the better part of six months in the middle of a war—when he came home after a year in iraq, he was diagnosed, like many, many coming home, with an aggressive and lethal cancer of the brain—who we lost. we have some sense, like many of you do, what the families of these brave heroes are feeling today. you get this feeling like you’re being sucked into a black hole in the middle of your chest; there’s no way out. my heart aches for you. but i know this: we have a continuing obligation, a sacred obligation to all of you—the families of those heroes. that obligation is not temporary; it lasts forever. the lives we lost today were lives given in the service of liberty, the service of security, in the service of others, in the service of america. like their fellow brothers and sisters in arms who died defending our vision and our values in the struggle against terrorism of—the fallen this day, they’re part of a great and noble company of american heroes. to those who carried out this attack, as well as anyone who wishes america harm, know this: we will not forgive. we will not forget. we will hunt you down and make you pay. i will defend our interests and our people with every measure at my command. over the past few weeks—i know you’re—many of you are probably tired of hearing me say it—we’ve been made aware by our intelligence community that the isis-k—an arch-enemy of the taliban; people who were freed when both those prisons were opened—has been planning a complex set of attacks on the united states personnel and others. this is why, from the outset, i’ve repeatedly said this mission was extraordinarily dangerous and why i have been so determined to limit the duration of this mission. and as general mckenzie said, this is why our mission was designed—this is the way it was designed to operate: operate under severe stress and attack. we’ve known that from the beginning. and as i’ve been in constant contact with our senior military leaders—and i mean constant, around the clock—and our commanders on the ground and throughout the day, they made it clear that we can and we must complete this mission, and we will. and that’s what i’ve ordered them to do. we will not be deterred by terrorists. we will not let them stop our mission. we will continue the evacuation. i’ve also ordered my commanders to develop operational plans to strike isis-k assets, leadership, and facilities. we will respond with force and precision at our time, at the place we choose, and the moment of our choosing. here is what you need to know: these isis terrorists will not win. we will rescue the americans who are there. we will get out our afghan allies out, and our mission will go on. america will not be intimidated. i have the utmost confidence in our brave service members who continue to execute this mission with courage and honor to save lives and get americans, our partners, our afghan allies out of afghanistan. every day when i talk to our commanders, i ask them what they need—what more do they need, if anything, to get the job done. as they will tell you, i granted every request. i reiterated to them again today, on three occasions, that they should take the maximum steps necessary to protect our forces on the ground in kabul. and i also want to thank the secretary of defense and the military leadership at the pentagon, and all the commanders in the field. there has been complete unanimity from every commander on the objectives of this mission and the best way to achieve those objectives. those who have served through the ages have drawn inspiration from the book of isaiah, when the lord says, “whom shall i send…who shall go for us?” and the american military has been answering for a long time: “here am i, lord. send me.” “here i am. send me.” each one of these women and men of our armed forces are the heirs of that tradition of sacrifice of volunteering to go into harm’s way, to risk everything—not for glory, not for profit, but to defend what we love and the people we love. and i ask that you join me now in a moment of silence for all those in uniform and out uniform—military and civilian, who have given the last full measure of devotion. (a moment of silence is taken.) thank you. may god bless you all. and may god protect those troops and all those standing watch for america. we have so much to do. it’s within our capacity to do it. we just have to remain steadfast. steadfast. we will complete our mission. and we will continue, after our troops have withdrawn, to find means by which we defined any american who wishes to get out of afghanistan. we will find them and we will get them out. ladies and gentlemen, they gave me a list here. the first person i was instructed to call on was kelly o’donnell of nbc. q mr. president, you have said leaving afghanistan is in the national interest of the united states. after today’s attack, do you believe you will authorize additional forces to respond to that attack inside afghanistan? and are you—are you prepared to add additional forces to protect those americans who remain on the ground carrying out the evacuation operation? i’ve instructed the military, whatever they need—if they need additional force—i will grant it. but the military—from the chairman of the joint chiefs, the joint chiefs, the commanders in the field—have all contacted me one way or another, usually by letter, saying they subscribe to the mission as designed to get as many people out as we can within the timeframe that is allotted. that is the best way, they believe, to get as many americans out as possible, and others. and with regard to finding, tracking down the isis leaders who ordered this, we have some reason to believe we know who they are—not certain—and we will find ways of our choosing, without large military operations, to get them. wherever they are. trevor from reuters. no, i don’t. look, i think general mckenzie handled this question very well. the fact is that we’re in a situation—we inherited a situation, particularly since, as we all know, that the afghan military collapsed 11 days before—in 11 days—that it is in the interest of, as mackenzie said, in the interest of the taliban that, in fact, isis-k does not metastasize beyond what it is, number one. and number two, it’s in their interest that we are able to leave on time, on target. as a consequence of that, the major things we’ve asked them—moving back the perimeter; give me more space between the wall; stopping vehicles from coming through, et cetera; searching people coming through—it is not what you’d call a tightly commanded, regimented operation like the u.s. is—the military is—but they’re acting in their interest—their interest. and so, by and large—and i’ve asked this same question to military on the ground, whether or not it’s a useful exercise. no one trusts them; we’re just counting on their self-interest to continue to generate their activities. and it’s in their self-interest that we leave when we said and that we get as many people out as we can. and like i said, even in the midst of everything that happened today, over 7,000 people have gotten out; over 5,000 americans overall. so, it’s not a matter of trust, it’s a matter of mutual self-interest. and—but there is no evidence thus far that i’ve been given, as a consequence by any of our commanders in the field, that there has been collusion between the taliban and isis in carrying out what happened today both in front of the hotel and what is expected to continue for—beyond today. aamer, associated press. because i think what america says matters. what we say we’re going to do and the context in which we say we’re going to do it, that we do it—unless something exceptional changes. there are additional american citizens, there are additional green card holders, there are additional personnel of our allies, there are additional siv card holders, there are additional afghans that have helped us, and there are additional groups of individuals that have contacted us from women’s groups, to ngos, and others, who have expressly indicated they want to get out and have gathered in certain circumstances in groups, on buses and other means, that still presents the opportunity for the next several days, between now and the 31st, to be able to get them out. and our military—and, i believe, to the extent that we can do that knowing the threat, knowing that we may very well have another attack—the military has concluded that’s what we should do. i think they’re right. i think they’re correct. and after that, we’re going to be in a circumstance where there are—will be, i believe, numerous opportunities to continue to provide access for additional persons to get out of afghanistan, either through means that we provide and/or are provided through cooperation with the taliban. they’re not good guys, the taliban. i’m not suggesting that at all. but they have a keen interest. as many of you have been reporting, they very much would like to figure out how to keep the airport open. they don’t have the capacity to do it. they very much are trying to figure out whether or not they can maintain what is the portion of an economy that has become not robust, but fundamentally different than it had been. and so there’s a lot of reasons why they have reached out not just to us, but to others, as to why it would be continued in their interest to get more of the personnel we want to get out. we can locate them. now, there’s not many left that we can assess that are—want to come out. there’s some americans we’ve identified—we’ve contacted the vast majority of them, if not all of them—who don’t want to leave because they have sig-—they’re dual nationals, they have extended families, et cetera. and there’s others who are looking for the time. so, that’s why we continue. i’ll take a few more questions, and—but, you, sir. i didn’t pick you, but that’s okay. (laughs.) i say — —we’re going to continue to try to get you out. it matters. look, i know of no conflict, as a student of history—no conflict where, when a war was ending, one side was able to guarantee that everyone that wanted to be extracted from that country would get out. and think about it, folks. i think it’s important for—i know the american people get this in their gut. there are, i would argue, millions of afghani citizens who are not taliban; who did not actively cooperate with us as sivs; who, if given a chance, they’d be onboard a plane tomorrow. it sounds ridiculous, but the vast majority of people in communities like that want to come to america, given a choice. so, getting every single person out is—can’t be guaranteed to anybody because there’s a determination, all who wants to get out as well. at any rate, it’s a process. i was really pointing to you, but—you, sir. here’s what i’ve done on the—ask this—i’ll answer the last question, first. on the tactical questions of how to conduct an evacuation or a war, i gather up all the major military personnel that are in afghanistan—the commanders, as well as the pentagon. and i ask for their best military judgment: what would be the most efficient way to accomplish the mission. they concluded—the military—that bagram was not much value added, that it was much wiser to focus on kabul. and so, i followed that recommendation. with regard to—there are certain circumstances where we’ve gotten information—and quite frankly, sometimes from some of you—saying, “you know of such and such a group of people who are trying to get out and they’re on a bus, they’re moving…”—from other people—“and this is their location.” and there have been occasions when our military has contacted their military counterparts in the taliban and said, “this…”—for example, “this bus is coming through with x number of people on it, made up of the following group of people. we want you to let that bus or that group through.” so, yes, there have been occasions like that. and to the best of my knowledge, in those cases, the bulk of that has occurred—they’ve been let through. but i can’t tell you with any certitude that there’s actually been a list of names. i don’t—there may have been, but i know of no circumstance. it doesn’t mean it’s not—it didn’t exist, that, “here’s the names of 12 people; they’re coming. let them through.” it could very well have happened. i’ll take one more question. whoa. wait, wait, wait. let me take the one question from the most interesting guy that i know in the press. that’s you. (laughter.) i bear responsibility for, fundamentally, all that’s happened of late. but here’s the deal: you know—i wish you’d one day say these things—you know as well as i do that the former president made a deal with the taliban that he would get all american forces out of afghanistan by may 1. in return, the commitment was made—and that was a year before—in return, he was given a commitment that the taliban would continue to attack others, but would not attack any american forces. remember that? i’m being serious. no, i—i’m asking you a question. be a—because before i — no, no—now wait a minute. i’m asking you a question. is that—is that accurate, to the best of your knowledge? what? i think they have an issue that people are likely to get hurt—some, as we’ve seen, have gotten killed—and that it is messy. the reason why—whether my friend will acknowledge it and was—reported it—the reason why there were no attacks on americans, as you said, from the date until i came into office, was because the commitment was made by president trump: “i will be out by may 1st. in the meantime, you agree not to attack any americans.” that was the deal. that’s why no american was attacked. yes, i do. because look at it this way, folks—and i’m going to—i have another meeting, for real. but imagine where we’d be if i had indicated, on may the 1st, i was not going to renegotiate an evacuation date; we were going to stay there. i’d have only one alternative: pour thousands of more troops back into afghanistan to fight a war that we had already won, relative—is why the reason we went in the first place. i have never been of the view that we should be sacrificing american lives to try to establish a democratic government in afghanistan—a country that has never once in its entire history been a united country, and is made up—and i don’t mean this in a derogatory—made up of different tribes who have never, ever, ever gotten along with one another. and so, as i said before—and this is the last comment i’ll make, but we’ll have more chance to talk about this, unfortunately, beyond, because we’re not out yet—if osama bin laden, as well as al qaeda, had chosen to launch an attack—when they left saudi arabia—out of yemen, would we have ever gone to afghanistan? even though the taliban completely controlled afghanistan at the time, would we have ever gone? i know it’s not fair to ask you questions. it’s rhetorical. but raise your hand if you think we should have gone and given up thousands of lives and tens of thousands of wounded. our interest in going was to prevent al qaeda from reemerging—first to get bin laden, wipe out al qaeda in afghanistan, and prevent that from happening again. as i’ve said 100 times: terrorism has metastasized around the world; we have greater threats coming out of other countries a heck of a lot closer to the united states. we don’t have military encampments there; we don’t keep people there. we have over-the-horizon capability to keep them from going after us. ladies and gentlemen, it was time to end a 20-year war. thank you so much. my fellow americans, i am speaking to you tonight from the oval office.before i begin, let me speak to important news from earlier today. after eight months of nonstop negotiation, my administration—by my administration, a ceasefire and a hostage deal has been reached by israel and hamas, the elements of which i laid out in great detail in may of this year.this plan was developed and negotiated by my team and will be largely implemented by the incoming administration. that’s why i told my team to keep the incoming administration fully informed, because that’s how it should be: working together as americans.this will be my final address to you, the american people, from the oval office, from this desk as president. and i’ve been thinking a lot about who we are and, maybe more importantly, who we should be.long ago, in new york harbor, an ironworker installed beam after beam, day after day. he was joined by steelworkers, stone masons, engineers. they built not just a single structure but a beacon of freedom.the very idea of america was so big, we felt the entire world needed to see the statue of liberty, a gift from france after our civil war. like the very idea of america, it was built not by one person but by many people, from every background and from around the world.like america, the statue of liberty is not standing still. her foot literally steps forward atop a broken chain of human bondage. she’s on the march, and she literally moves. she was built to sway back and forth to withstand the fury of stormy weather, to stand the test of time, because storms are always coming. she sways a few inches, but she never falls into the current below—an engineering marvel.the statue of liberty is also an enduring symbol of the soul of our nation, a soul shaped by forces that bring us together and by forces that pull us apart. and yet, through good times and tough times, we’ve withstood it all.a nation of pioneers and explorers, of dreamers and doers, of ancestors native to this land, of ancestors who came by force, a nation of immigrants who came to build a better life, a nation holding the torch of the most powerful idea ever in the history of the world that all of us, all of us are created equal. that all of us deserve to be treated with dignity, justice, and fairness. that democracy must defend and be defined and be imposed, moved in every way possible. our rights, our freedoms, our dreams.but we know the idea of america—our institution, our people, our values that uphold it—are constantly being tested. ongoing debates about power and the exercise of power, about whether we lead by the example of our power or the power of our example, whether we show the courage to stand up to the abuse of power or we yield to it.after 50 years at the center of all of this, i know that believing in the idea of america means respecting the institutions that govern a free society: the presidency, the congress, the courts, a free and independent press. institutions that are rooted not to reflect the timeless words, but they echo the words of the declaration of independence: “we hold these truths to be self-evident.” rooted in the timeless words of the constitution, “we the people.”our system of separation of powers, checks and balances, it may not be perfect, but it’s maintained our democracy for nearly 250 years, longer than any other nation in history that’s ever tried such a bold experiment.in the past four years, our democracy has held strong. and every day, i’ve kept my commitment to be president for all americans through one of the toughest periods in our nation’s history.i’ve had a great partner in vice president kamala harris.it’s been the honor of my life to see the resilience of essential workers getting us through a once-in-a-century pandemic, the heroism of service members and first responders keeping us safe, the determination of advocates standing up for our rights and our freedoms.instead of losing their jobs to an economic crisis that we inherited, millions of americans now have the dignity of work; millions of entrepreneurs and companies creating new businesses and industries, hiring american workers, using american products.and together, we’ve launched a new era of american possibilities—one of the greatest modernizations of infrastructure in our entire history, from new roads, bridges, clean water, affordable high-speed internet for every american.we invented the semiconductor—smaller than the tip of my little finger. and now it’s bringing those chip factories and those jobs back to america where they belong, creating thousands of jobs.finally giving medicare the power to negotiate lower prescription drug prices for millions of seniors.and finally doing something to protect our children and our families by passing the most significant gun safety law in 30 years and bringing violent crime to a 50-year low.meeting our sacred obligation to over 1 million veterans so far who were exposed to toxic materials, and to their families—providing medical care and education benefits and more for their families.you know, it will take time to feel the full impact of all we’ve done together. but the seeds are planted, and they’ll grow and they’ll bloom for decades to come.at home, we’ve created nearly 17 million new jobs—more than any other single administration in a single term.more people have health care than ever before.and overseas, we’ve strengthened nato. ukraine is still free. and we’ve pulled ahead of our competition with china. and so much more.i’m so proud of how much we’ve accomplished together for the american people. and i wish the incoming administration success, because i want america to succeed.that’s why i’ve upheld my duty to ensure a peaceful and orderly transition of power to ensure we lead by the power of our example. i have no doubt that america is in a position to continue to succeed.that’s why, in my farewell address tonight, i want to warn the country of some things that give me great concern. and this is the dangerous concern and that’s the dangerous concentration of power in the hands of very few ultra-wealthy people, and the dangerous consequences if their abuse of power is left unchecked.today, an oligarchy is taking shape in america of extreme wealth, power, and influence that literally threatens our entire democracy, our basic rights and freedoms, and a fair shot for everyone to get ahead.we see the consequences all across america. and we’ve seen it before, more than a century ago. but the american people stood up to the robber barons back then and busted the trusts.they didn’t punish the wealthy. they just made the wealthy play by the rules everybody else had to. workers won rights to earn their fair share. you know, they were dealt into the deal, and it helped put us on the path to building the largest middle class and the most prosperous century any nation the world has ever seen, and we’ve got to do that again.in the last four years, that is exactly what we’ve done.people should be able to make as much as they can, but pplay by the same rules, pay their fair share in taxes.so much is at stake. right now, the existential threat of climate change has never been clearer. just look across the country, from california to north carolina.that’s why i signed the most significant climate and clean energy law ever, ever in the history of the world, and the rest of the world is trying to model it now. it’s working, creating jobs and industries of the future.you know, we’ve proven we don’t have to choose between protecting the environment and growing the economy. we’re doing both.but powerful forces want to wield their unchecked influence to eliminate the steps we’ve taken to tackle the climate crisis to serve their own interest for power and profit.we must not be bullied into sacrificing the future, the future of our children and our grandchildren. we must keep pushing forward and push faster. there is no time to waste.it’s also clear that american leadership in technology is unparalleled—an unparalleled source of innovation that can transform lives. we see the same dangers of the concentration of technology, power, and wealth.you know, his farewell address, president eisenhower spoke of the dangers of the military-industrial complex. he warned us then about, and i quote, “the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power,” end of quote.six decades later, i’m equally concerned about the potential rise of a tech-industrial complex that could pose real dangers for our country as well.americans are being buried under an avalanche of misinformation and disinformation enabling the abuse of power. the free press is crumbling. editors are disappearing. social media is giving up on fact-checking. the truth is smothered by lies told for power and for profit.we must hold the social platforms accountable to protect our children, our families, and our very democracy from the abuse of power.meanwhile, artificial intelligence is the most consequential technology of our time—perhaps of all time. nothing offers more profound possibilities and risks for our economy and our security, our society, our very...for humanity.artificial intelligence even has the potential to help us answer my call to end cancer as we know it. but unless safeguards are in place, ai could spawn new threats to our rights, our way of life, to our privacy, how we work, and how we protect our nation.we must make sure ai is safe and trustworthy and good for all humankind.in the age of ai, it’s more important than ever that the people must govern. and as the land of liberty, america—not china—must lead the world on the development of ai.you know, in the years ahead, it will help to be, it’s going to be up to the president, the presidency, the congress, the courts, the free press, and the american people to confront these powerful forces.we must reform the tax code—not by giving the biggest tax cuts to billionaires, but by making them begin to pay their fair share.we need to get dark money, that’s hidden funding behind too many campaigns’ contributions, we need to get it out of our politics.we need to enact an 18-year time limit, term limit, time and term, for the strongest ethics reforms for our supreme court.we need to ban members of congress from trading stock while they’re in the congress.we need to amend the constitution to make clear that no president—no president—is immune from crimes that he or she commits while in office. the president’s power is limit, it’s not absolute, and it shouldn’t be.and in a democracy, there’s another danger to the concentration of power and wealth. it erodes a sense of unity and common purpose. it causes distrust and division. participating in our democracy becomes exhausting and even disillusioning, and people don’t feel like they have a fair shot.but we have to stay engaged in the process. i know it’s frustrating.a fair shot is what makes america, america. everyone is entitled to a fair shot—not a guarantee, but just a fair shot, an even playing field—going as far as your hard work and talent can take you.we can never lose that essential truth—emain who we are.i’ve always believed and i’ve told other world leaders america can be defined by one word: possibilities.only in america do we believe anything possible, like a kid with a stutter from modest beginnings in scranton, pennsylvania, and claymont, delaware, sitting behind this desk in the oval office as president of the united states.that’s the magic of america. it’s all around us.upstairs in the residence of the white house, i’ve walked by a painting of the statue of liberty i don’t know how many times. in the painting, there are several workers climbing on the outstretched arm of the statue that holds the torch. it reminds me every day i pass it of the story and soul of our nation and the power of the american people.there’s a story of a veteran, a son of an immigrant, whose job it was to climb that torch and polish the amber panes so rays of light could reach out as far as possible. he was known as the “keeper of the flame.”he once said of the statue of liberty, quote, “speaks a silent universal language, one of hope, that anyone who seeks and speaks freedom can understand.”yes, we sway back and forth to withstand the fury of the storm, to stand the test of time—a constant struggle, constant struggle—a short distance between peril and possibility.but what i believe is the america of our dreams is always closer than we think. and it’s up to us to make our dreams come true.let me close by stating my gratitude to so many people. to the members of my administration, as well as public service and first responders across the country and around the world, thank you for stepping up to serve.to our service members and your families, it’s been the highest honor of my life to lead you as commander in chief.and, of course, to kamala and her incredible partner, a historic vice president. she and doug have become like family. and to me, family is everything.my deepest appreciation to our amazing first lady, who is with me in the oval today, for our entire family. you are the love of my life and lifes of my love.and my eternal thanks to you, the american people. after 50 years of public service, i give you my word, i still believe in the idea for which this nation stands, a nation where the strengths of our institutions and the character of our people matter and must endure.now it’s your turn to stand guard. may you all be the keeper of the flame. may you keep the faith.i love america. you love it too.god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you for this great honor. good evening, my fellow americans. i want to talk to you about where we are in the battle against covid-19, the progress we’ve made, and the work we have left to do. and it starts with understanding this: even as the delta variant 19 [sic] has—covid-19—has been hitting this country hard, we have the tools to combat the virus, if we can come together as a country and use those tools. if we raise our vaccination rate, protect ourselves and others with masking and expanded testing, and identify people who are infected, we can and we will turn the tide on covid-19. it will take a lot of hard work, and it’s going to take some time. many of us are frustrated with the nearly 80 million americans who are still not vaccinated, even though the vaccine is safe, effective, and free. you might be confused about what is true and what is false about covid-19. so before i outline the new steps to fight covid-19 that i’m going to be announcing tonight, let me give you some clear information about where we stand. first, we have cons—we have made considerable progress in battling covid-19. when i became president, about 2 million americans were fully vaccinated. today, over 175 million americans have that protection. before i took office, we hadn’t ordered enough vaccine for every american. just weeks in office, we did. the week before i took office, on january 20th of this year, over 25,000 americans died that week from covid-19. last week, that grim weekly toll was down 70 percent. and in the three months before i took office, our economy was faltering, creating just 50,000 jobs a month. we’re now averaging 700,000 new jobs a month in the past three months. this progress is real. but while america is in much better shape than it was seven months ago when i took office, i need to tell you a second fact. we’re in a tough stretch, and it could last for a while. the highly contagious delta variant that i began to warn america about back in july spread in late summer like it did in other countries before us. while the vaccines provide strong protections for the vaccinated, we read about, we hear about, and we see the stories of hospitalized people, people on their death beds, among the unvaccinated over these past few weeks. this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated. and it’s caused by the fact that despite america having an unprecedented and successful vaccination program, despite the fact that for almost five months free vaccines have been available in 80,000 different locations, we still have nearly 80 million americans who have failed to get the shot. and to make matters worse, there are elected officials actively working to undermine the fight against covid-19. instead of encouraging people to get vaccinated and mask up, they’re ordering mobile morgues for the unvaccinated dying from covid in their communities. this is totally unacceptable. third, if you wonder how all this adds up, here’s the math: the vast majority of americans are doing the right thing. nearly three quarters of the eligible have gotten at least one shot, but one quarter has not gotten any. that’s nearly 80 million americans not vaccinated. and in a country as large as ours, that’s 25 percent minority. that 25 percent can cause a lot of damage—and they are. the unvaccinated overcrowd our hospitals, are overrunning the emergency rooms and intensive care units, leaving no room for someone with a heart attack, or pancreitis [pancreatitis], or cancer. and fourth, i want to emphasize that the vaccines provide very strong protection from severe illness from covid-19. i know there’s a lot of confusion and misinformation. but the world’s leading scientists confirm that if you are fully vaccinated, your risk of severe illness from covid-19 is very low. in fact, based on available data from the summer, only one of out of every 160,000 fully vaccinated americans was hospitalized for covid per day. these are the facts. so here’s where we stand: the path ahead, even with the delta variant, is not nearly as bad as last winter. but what makes it incredibly more frustrating is that we have the tools to combat covid-19, and a distinct minority of americans –supported by a distinct minority of elected officials—are keeping us from turning the corner. these pandemic politics, as i refer to, are making people sick, causing unvaccinated people to die. we cannot allow these actions to stand in the way of protecting the large majority of americans who have done their part and want to get back to life as normal. as your president, i’m announcing tonight a new plan to require more americans to be vaccinated, to combat those blocking public health. my plan also increases testing, protects our economy, and will make our kids safer in schools. it consists of six broad areas of action and many specific measures in each that—and each of those actions that you can read more about at whitehouse.gov. whitehouse.gov. the measures—these are going to take time to have full impact. but if we implement them, i believe and the scientists indicate, that in the months ahead we can reduce the number of unvaccinated americans, decrease hospitalizations and deaths, and allow our children to go to school safely and keep our economy strong by keeping businesses open. first, we must increase vaccinations among the unvaccinated with new vaccination requirements. of the nearly 80 million eligible americans who have not gotten vaccinated, many said they were waiting for approval from the food and drug administration—the fda. well, last month, the fda granted that approval. so, the time for waiting is over. this summer, we made progress through the combination of vaccine requirements and incentives, as well as the fda approval. four million more people got their first shot in august than they did in july. but we need to do more. this is not about freedom or personal choice. it’s about protecting yourself and those around you—the people you work with, the people you care about, the people you love. my job as president is to protect all americans. so, tonight, i’m announcing that the department of labor is developing an emergency rule to require all employers with 100 or more employees, that together employ over 80 million workers, to ensure their workforces are fully vaccinated or show a negative test at least once a week. some of the biggest companies are already requiring this: united airlines, disney, tysons food, and even fox news. the bottom line: we’re going to protect vaccinated workers from unvaccinated co-workers. we’re going to reduce the spread of covid-19 by increasing the share of the workforce that is vaccinated in businesses all across america. my plan will extend the vaccination requirements that i previously issued in the healthcare field. already, i’ve announced, we’ll be requiring vaccinations that all nursing home workers who treat patients on medicare and medicaid, because i have that federal authority. tonight, i’m using that same authority to expand that to cover those who work in hospitals, home healthcare facilities, or other medical facilities–a total of 17 million healthcare workers. if you’re seeking care at a health facility, you should be able to know that the people treating you are vaccinated. simple. straightforward. period. next, i will sign an executive order that will now require all executive branch federal employees to be vaccinated—all. and i’ve signed another executive order that will require federal contractors to do the same. if you want to work with the federal government and do business with us, get vaccinated. if you want to do business with the federal government, vaccinate your workforce. and tonight, i’m removing one of the last remaining obstacles that make it difficult for you to get vaccinated. the department of labor will require employers with 100 or more workers to give those workers paid time off to get vaccinated. no one should lose pay in order to get vaccinated or take a loved one to get vaccinated. today, in total, the vaccine requirements in my plan will affect about 100 million americans—two thirds of all workers. and for other sectors, i issue this appeal: to those of you running large entertainment venues—from sports arenas to concert venues to movie theaters—please require folks to get vaccinated or show a negative test as a condition of entry. and to the nation’s family physicians, pediatricians, gps—general practitioners—you’re the most trusted medical voice to your patients. you may be the one person who can get someone to change their mind about being vaccinated. tonight, i’m asking each of you to reach out to your unvaccinated patients over the next two weeks and make a personal appeal to them to get the shot. america needs your personal involvement in this critical effort. and my message to unvaccinated americans is this: what more is there to wait for? what more do you need to see? we’ve made vaccinations free, safe, and convenient. the vaccine has fda approval. over 200 million americans have gotten at least one shot. we’ve been patient, but our patience is wearing thin. and your refusal has cost all of us. so, please, do the right thing. but just don’t take it from me; listen to the voices of unvaccinated americans who are lying in hospital beds, taking their final breaths, saying, “if only i had gotten vaccinated.” “if only.” it’s a tragedy. please don’t let it become yours. the second piece of my plan is continuing to protect the vaccinated. for the vast majority of you who have gotten vaccinated, i understand your anger at those who haven’t gotten vaccinated. i understand the anxiety about getting a “breakthrough” case. but as the science makes clear, if you’re fully vaccinated, you’re highly protected from severe illness, even if you get covid-19. in fact, recent data indicates there is only one confirmed positive case per 5,000 fully vaccinated americans per day. you’re as safe as possible, and we’re doing everything we can to keep it that way—keep it that way, keep you safe. that’s where boosters come in—the shots that give you even more protection than after your second shot. now, i know there’s been some confusion about boosters. so, let me be clear: last month, our top government doctors announced an initial plan for booster shots for vaccinated americans. they believe that a booster is likely to provide the highest level of protection yet. of course, the decision of which booster shots to give, when to start them, and who will give them, will be left completely to the scientists at the fda and the centers for disease control. but while we wait, we’ve done our part. we’ve bought enough boosters—enough booster shots—and the distribution system is ready to administer them. as soon as they are authorized, those eligible will be able to get a booster right away in tens of thousands of site across the—sites across the country for most americans, at your nearby drug store, and for free. the third piece of my plan is keeping—and maybe the most important—is keeping our children safe and our schools open. for any parent, it doesn’t matter how low the risk of any illness or accident is when it comes to your child or grandchild. trust me, i know. so, let me speak to you directly. let me speak to you directly to help ease some of your worries. it comes down to two separate categories: children ages 12 and older who are eligible for a vaccine now, and children ages 11 and under who are not are yet eligible. the safest thing for your child 12 and older is to get them vaccinated. they get vaccinated for a lot of things. that’s it. get them vaccinated. as with adults, almost all the serious covid-19 cases we’re seeing among adolescents are in unvaccinated 12- to 17-year-olds—an age group that lags behind in vaccination rates. so, parents, please get your teenager vaccinated. what about children under the age of 12 who can’t get vaccinated yet? well, the best way for a parent to protect their child under the age of 12 starts at home. every parent, every teen sibling, every caregiver around them should be vaccinated. children have four times higher chance of getting hospitalized if they live in a state with low vaccination rates rather than the states with high vaccination rates. now, if you’re a parent of a young child, you’re wondering when will it be—when will it be—the vaccine available for them. i strongly support an independent scientific review for vaccine uses for children under 12. we can’t take shortcuts with that scientific work. but i’ve made it clear i will do everything within my power to support the fda with any resource it needs to continue to do this as safely and as quickly as possible, and our nation’s top doctors are committed to keeping the public at large updated on the process so parents can plan. now to the schools. we know that if schools follow the science and implement the safety measures—like testing, masking, adequate ventilation systems that we provided the money for, social distancing, and vaccinations—then children can be safe from covid-19 in schools. today, about 90 percent of school staff and teachers are vaccinated. we should get that to 100 percent. my administration has already acquired teachers at the schools run by the defense department—because i have the authority as president in the federal system—the defense department and the interior department—to get vaccinated. that’s authority i possess. tonight, i’m announcing that we’ll require all of nearly 300,000 educators in the federal paid program, head start program, must be vaccinated as well to protect your youngest—our youngest—most precious americans and give parents the comfort. and tonight, i’m calling on all governors to require vaccination for all teachers and staff. some already have done so, but we need more to step up. vaccination requirements in schools are nothing new. they work. they’re overwhelmingly supported by educators and their unions. and to all school officials trying to do the right thing by our children: i’ll always be on your side. let me be blunt. my plan also takes on elected officials and states that are undermining you and these lifesaving actions. right now, local school officials are trying to keep children safe in a pandemic while their governor picks a fight with them and even threatens their salaries or their jobs. talk about bullying in schools. if they’ll not help—if these governors won’t help us beat the pandemic, i’ll use my power as president to get them out of the way. the department of education has already begun to take legal action against states undermining protection that local school officials have ordered. any teacher or school official whose pay is withheld for doing the right thing, we will have that pay restored by the federal government 100 percent. i promise you i will have your back. the fourth piece of my plan is increasing testing and masking. from the start, america has failed to do enough covid-19 testing. in order to better detect and control the delta variant, i’m taking steps tonight to make testing more available, more affordable, and more convenient. i’ll use the defense production act to increase production of rapid tests, including those that you can use at home. while that production is ramping up, my administration has worked with top retailers, like walmart, amazon, and kroger’s, and tonight we’re announcing that, no later than next week, each of these outlets will start to sell at-home rapid test kits at cost for the next three months. this is an immediate price reduction for at-home test kits for up to 35 percent reduction. we’ll also expand—expand free testing at 10,000 pharmacies around the country. and we’ll commit—we’re committing $2 billion to purchase nearly 300 million rapid tests for distribution to community health centers, food banks, schools, so that every american, no matter their income, can access free and convenient tests. this is important to everyone, particularly for a parent or a child—with a child not old enough to be vaccinated. you’ll be able to test them at home and test those around them. in addition to testing, we know masking helps stop the spread of covid-19. that’s why when i came into office, i required masks for all federal buildings and on federal lands, on airlines, and other modes of transportation. today—tonight, i’m announcing that the transportation safety administration—the tsa—will double the fines on travelers that refuse to mask. if you break the rules, be prepared to pay. and, by the way, show some respect. the anger you see on television toward flight attendants and others doing their job is wrong; it’s ugly. the fifth piece of my plan is protecting our economic recovery. because of our vaccination program and the american rescue plan, which we passed early in my administration, we’ve had record job creation for a new administration, economic growth unmatched in 40 years. we cannot let unvaccinated do this progress—undo it, turn it back. so tonight, i’m announcing additional steps to strengthen our economic recovery. we’ll be expanding covid-19 economic injury disaster loan programs. that’s a program that’s going to allow small businesses to borrow up to $2 million from the current $500,000 to keep going if covid-19 impacts on their sales. these low-interest, long-term loans require no repayment for two years and be can used to hire and retain workers, purchase inventory, or even pay down higher cost debt racked up since the pandemic began. i’ll also be taking additional steps to help small businesses stay afloat during the pandemic. sixth, we’re going to continue to improve the care of those who do get covid-19. in early july, i announced the deployment of surge response teams. these are teams comprised of experts from the department of health and human services, the cdc, the defense department, and the federal emergency management agency—fema—to areas in the country that need help to stem the spread of covid-19. since then, the federal government has deployed nearly 1,000 staff, including doctors, nurses, paramedics, into 18 states. today, i’m announcing that the defense department will double the number of military health teams that they’ll deploy to help their fellow americans in hospitals around the country. additionally, we’re increasing the availability of new medicines recommended by real doctors, not conspir-—conspiracy theorists. the monoclonal antibody treatments have been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization by up to 70 percent for unvaccinated people at risk of developing sefe-—severe disease. we’ve already distributed 1.4 million courses of these treatments to save lives and reduce the strain on hospitals. tonight, i’m announcing we will increase the average pace of shipment across the country of free monoclonal antibody treatments by another 50 percent. before i close, let me say this: communities of color are disproportionately impacted by this virus. and as we continue to battle covid-19, we will ensure that equity continues to be at the center of our response. we’ll ensure that everyone is reached. my first responsibility as president is to protect the american people and make sure we have enough vaccine for every american, including enough boosters for every american who’s approved to get one. we also know this virus transcends borders. that’s why, even as we execute this plan at home, we need to continue fighting the virus overseas, continue to be the arsenal of vaccines. we’re proud to have donated nearly 140 million vaccines over 90 countries, more than all other countries combined, including europe, china, and russia combined. that’s american leadership on a global stage, and that’s just the beginning. we’ve also now started to ship another 500 million covid vaccines—pfizer vaccines—purchased to donate to 100 lower-income countries in need of vaccines. and i’ll be announcing additional steps to help the rest of the world later this month. as i recently released the key parts of my pandemic preparedness plan so that america isn’t caught flat-footed when a new pandemic comes again—as it will—next month, i’m also going to release the plan in greater detail. so let me close with this: we have so-—we’ve made so much progress during the past seven months of this pandemic. the recent increases in vaccinations in august already are having an impact in some states where case counts are dropping in recent days. even so, we remain at a critical moment, a critical time. we have the tools. now we just have to finish the job with truth, with science, with confidence, and together as one nation. look, we’re the united states of america. there’s nothing—not a single thing—we’re unable to do if we do it together. so let’s stay together. god bless you all and all those who continue to serve on the frontlines of this pandemic. and may god protect our troops. get vaccinated. my fellow americans, i’m speaking to you tonight from behind the resolute desk in the oval office. in this sacred space, i’m surrounded by portraits of extraordinary american presidents. thomas jefferson, who wrote the immortal words that guide this nation. george washington, who showed us presidents are not kings. abraham lincoln, who implored us to reject malice. franklin roosevelt, who inspired us to reject fear. i revere this office, but i love my country more. it’s been the honor of my life to serve as your president. but in the defense of democracy, which is at stake, i think it’s more important than any title. i draw strength and i find joy in working for the american people. but this sacred task of perfecting our union — it’s not about me. it’s about you, your families, your futures. it’s about “we the people.” we can never forget that, and i never have. i’ve made it clear that i believe america is at an inflection point, one of those rare moments in history when the decisions we make now will determine our fate of our nation and the world for decades to come. america is going to have to choose between moving forward or backward, between hope and hate, between unity and division. we have to decide: do we still believe in honesty, decency, and respect; freedom, justice, and democracy? in this moment, we can see those we disagree with not as enemies but as fellow americans. can we do that? does character in public life still matter? i believe i know the answer to these questions, because i know you, the american people. and i know this: we are a great nation because we are a good people. when you elected me to this office, i promised to always level with you, to tell you the truth. and the truth, the sacred cause of this country is larger than any one of us. and those of us who cherish that cause — cherish it so much — the cause of american democracy itself — must unite to protect it. you know, in recent weeks, it’s become clear to me that i needed to unite my party in this critical endeavor. i believe my record as president, my leadership in the world, my vision for america’s future all merited a second term, but nothing — nothing — can come in the way of saving our democracy. that includes personal ambition. so, i’ve decided the best way forward is to pass the torch to a new generation. that’s the best way to unite our nation. i know there is a time and a place for long years of experience in public life. but there is also a time and place for new voices, fresh voices — yes, younger voices. and that time and place is now. over the next six months, i’ll be focused on doing my job as president. that means i will continue to lower costs for hardworking families, grow our economy. i’ll keep defending our personal freedoms and our civil rights, from the right to vote to the right to choose. and i’ll keep calling out hate and extremism and make it clear there is no place — no place in america for political violence or any violence ever, period. i’m going to keep speaking out to protect our kids from gun violence, our planet from the climate crisis. it is the existential threat. and i will keep fighting for my cancer moonshot so we can end cancer as we know it, because we can do it. and i’m going to call for supreme court reform because this is critical to our democracy — supreme court reform. you know, i will keep working to ensure america remains strong and secure and the leader of the free world. i’m the first president in this century to report to the american people that the united states is not at war anywhere in the world. i will keep rallying a coalition of proud nations to stop putin from taking over ukraine and doing more damage. i will keep nato stronger, and i’ll make it more powerful and more united than any time in all of our history. and i’ll keep doing the same for our allies in the pacific. you know, when i came to office, the conventional wisdom was that china would inevitably surpass the united states. that’s not the case anymore. and i’m going to keep working to end the war in gaza, bring home all the hostages, and bring peace and security to the middle east and end this war. we’re also working around the clock to bring home americans being unjustly detained all around the world. you know, we have come so far since my inauguration. on that day, i told you as i stood in that winter — we stood in a winter of peril and a winter of possibilities — peril and possibilities. we’re in the grip of the worst pandemic in a century, the worst economic crisis since the great depression, the worst attack on our democracy since the civil war. but we came together as americans and we got through it. we emerged stronger, more prosperous, and more secure. and today, we have the strongest economy in the world, creating nearly 16 million new jobs — a record. wages are up. inflation continues to come down. the racial wealth gap is the lowest it’s been in 20 years. we’re literally rebuilding our entire nation — urban, suburban, rural, and tribal communities. manufacturing has come back to america. we’re leading the world again in chips and science and innovation. and we finally beat big pharma after all these years to lower the cost of prescription drugs for seniors. and i’m going to keep fighting to make sure we lower the costs for everyone, not just seniors. more people have health care today in america than ever before. and i signed one of the most significant laws helping millions of veterans and their families who were exposed to toxic materials. you know, the most significant climate law ever in the history of the world. the first major gun safety law in 30 years. and today, the violent crime rate is at a 50-year low. we’re also securing our border. border crossings are lower today than when the previous administration left office. and i kept my commitment to appoint the first black woman to the supreme court of the united states of america. i also kept my commitment to have an administration that looks like america and to be a president for all americans. that’s what i’ve done. i ran for president four years ago because i believed and still do that the soul of america was at stake. the very nature of who we are was at stake. and that’s still the case. america is an idea — an idea stronger than any army, bigger than any ocean, more powerful than any dictator or tyrant. it’s the most powerful idea in the history of the world. that idea is that we hold these truths to be self-evident. we’re all created equal, endowed by our creator with certain unalienable rights: life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness. we’ve never fully lived up to it — to this sacred idea, but we’ve never walked away from it either. and i do not believe the american people will walk away from it now. in just a few months, the american people will choose the course of america’s future. i made my choice. i have made my views known. i would like to thank our great vice president, kamala harris. she’s experienced. she’s tough. she’s capable. she has been an incredible partner to me and a leader for our country. now the choice is up to you, the american people. when you make that choice, remember the words of benjamin franklin, who’s hanging on my wall here in the oval office alongside the busts of dr. king and rosa parks and cesar chavez. when ben franklin was asked as he emerged from the convention going on whether the founders had given america a monarchy or a republic, franklin’s response was, “a republic, if you can keep it.” “a republic, if you can keep it.” whether we keep our republic is now in your hands. my fellow americans, it’s been the privilege of my life to serve this nation for over 50 years. nowhere else on earth could a kid with a stutter from modest beginnings in scranton, pennsylvania, and claymont, delaware, one day sit behind the resolute desk in the oval office as president of the united states. but here i am. that’s what’s so special about america. we are a nation of promise and possibilities, of dreamers and doers, of ordinary americans doing extraordinary things. i have given my heart and my soul to our nation, like so many others. and i have been blessed a million times in return with the love and support of the american people. i hope you have some idea how grateful i am to all of you. the great thing about america is here kings and dictators do not rule. the people do. history is in your hands. the power is in your hands. the idea of america lies in your hands. we just have to keep the faith and remember who we are. we are the united states of america, and there is simply nothing — nothing beyond our capacity when we do it together. so, let’s act together, preserve our democracy. god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you. my fellow americans, i want to speak to you tonight about the need for us to lower the temperature in our politics and to remember, while we may disagree, we are not enemies. we’re neighbors. we’re friends, coworkers, citizens. and, most importantly, we are fellow americans. and we must stand together. yesterday’s shooting at donald trump’s rally in pennsylvania calls on all of us to take a step back, take stock of where we are, how we go forward from here. thankfully, former [president] trump is not seriously injured. i spoke with him last night. i’m grateful he’s doing well. and jill and i keep him and his family in our prayers. we also extend our deepest condolences to the family of the victim who was killed. corey was a husband, a father, a volunteer firefighter, a hero, sheltering his family from those bullets. we should all hold his family and all those injured in our prayers.earlier today, i spoke about an ongoing investigation. we do not know the motive of the shooter yet. we don’t know his opinions or affiliations. we don’t know whether he had help or support or if he communicated with anyone else. law enforcement professionals, as i speak, are investigating those questions. tonight, i want to speak to what we do know: a former president was shot. an american citizen killed while simply exercising his freedom to support the candidate of his choosing. we cannot — we must not go down this road in america. we’ve traveled it before throughout our history. violence has never been the answer, whether it’s with members of congress in both parties being targeted in the shot, or a violent mob attacking the capitol on january 6th, or a brutal attack on the spouse of former speaker of the house nancy pelosi, or information and intimidation on election officials, or the kidnapping plot against a sitting governor, or an attempted assassination on donald trump.there is no place in america for this kind of violence or for any violence ever. period. no exceptions. we can’t allow this violence to be normalized. you know, the political rhetoric in this country has gotten very heated. it’s time to cool it down. and we all have a responsibility to do that. yes, we have deeply felt, strong disagreements. the stakes in this election are enormously high. i’ve said it many times that the choice in this elect— that we make in this election is going to shape the future of america and the world for decades to come. i believe that with all my soul. i know that millions of my fellow americans believe it as well.and some have a different view as to the direction our country should take. disagreement is inevitable in american democracy. it’s part of human nature. but politics must never be a literal battlefield and, god forbid, a killing field.i believe politics ought to be an arena for peaceful debate, to pursue justice, to make decisions guided by the declaration of independence and our constitution. we stand for an america not of extremism and fury but of decency and grace. all of us now face a time of testing as the election approaches. and the higher the stakes, the more fervent the passions become. this places an added burden on each of us to ensure that no matter how strong our convictions, we must never descend into violence. the republican convention will start tomorrow. i have no doubt they’ll criticize my record and offer their own vision for this country. i’ll be traveling this week, making the case for our record and the vision — my vision of the country — our vision. i’ll continue to speak out strongly for our democracy, stand up for our constitution and the rule of law, to call for action at the ballot box, no violence on our streets. that’s how democracy should work. we debate and disagree. we compare and contrast the character of the candidates, the records, the issues, the agenda, the vision for america. but in america, we resolve our differences at the battol [ballot] box. you know, that’s how we do it, at the battol [ballot] box, not with bullets. the power to change america should always rest in the hands of the people, not in the hands of a would-be assassin.you know, the path forward through competing visions of the campaign should always be resolved peacefully, not through acts of violence.you know, we’re blessed to live in the greatest country on earth. and i believe that with every soul — every power of my being. so, tonight, i’m asking every american to recommit to make america so — make america what it — think about it. what’s made america so special? here in america, everyone wants to be treated with dignity and respect, and hate must have no safe harbor. here in america, we need to get out of our silos, where we only listen to those with whom we agree, where misinformation is rampant, where foreign actors fan the flames of our division to shape the outcomes consistent with their interests, not ours.let’s remember, here in america, while unity is the most elusive of goals right now, nothing is more — more important for us now than standing together. we can do this. you know, from the beginning, our founders understood the power of passion, and so they created a democracy that gave reason and balance a chance to prevail over brute force. that’s the america we must be, an american democracy where arguments are made in good faith, an american democracy where the rule of law is respected, an american democracy where decency, dignity, fair play aren’t just quaint notions, but living, breathing realities.we owe that to those who come before us, to those who gave their lives for this country. we that — we owe that to ourselves. we owe it to our children and our grandchildren. look, let’s never lose sight of who we are. let’s remember we are the united states of america. there is nothing, nothing, nothing beyond our capacity when we do it together.so, god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. sorry to keep you waiting. good afternoon. the russian military has begun a brutal assault on the people of ukraine without provocation, without justification, without necessity. this is a premeditated attack. vladimir putin has been planning this for months, as i’ve been—as we’ve been saying all along. he moved more than 175,000 troops, military equipment into positions along the ukrainian border. he moved blood supplies into position and built a field hospital, which tells you all you need to know about his intentions all along. he rejected every good-faith effort the united states and our allies and partners made to address our mutual security concerns through dialogue to avoid needless conflict and avert human suffering. for weeks—for weeks, we have been warning that this would happen. and now it’s unfolding largely as we predicted. in the past week, we’ve seen shelling increase in the donbas, the region in eastern ukraine controlled by russian-backed separatists. rus-—the russian government has perpetrated cyberattacks against ukraine. we saw a staged political theater in moscow—outlandish and baseless claims that ukraine was—ukraine was about to invade and launch a war against russia, that ukraine was prepared to use chemical weapons, that ukraine committed a genocide—without any evidence. we saw a flagrant violation of international law in attempting to unilaterally create two new so-called republics on sovereign ukrainian territory. and at the very moment that the united nations security council was meeting to stand up for ukraine’s sovereignty to stave off invasion, putin declared his war. within moments—moments, missile strikes began to fall on historic cities across ukraine. then came in the air raids, followed by tanks and troops rolling in. we’ve been transparent with the world. we’ve shared declassified evidence about russia’s plans and cyberattacks and false pretexts so that there can be no confusion or cover-up about what putin was doing. putin is the aggressor. putin chose this war. and now he and his country will bear the consequences. today, i’m authorizing additional strong sanctions and new limitations on what can be exported to russia. this is going to impose severe costs on the russian economy, both immediately and over time. we have purposefully designed these sanctions to maximize the long-term impact on russia and to minimize the impact on the united states and our allies. and i want to be clear: the united states is not doing this alone. for months, we’ve been building a coalition of partners representing well more than half of the global economy. twenty-seven members of the european union, including france, germany, italy—as well as the united kingdom, canada, japan, australia, new zealand, and many others—to amplify the joint impact of our response. i just spoke with the g7 leaders this morning, and we are in full and total agreement. we will limit russia’s ability to do business in dollars, euros, pounds, and yen to be part of the global economy. we will limit their ability to do that. we are going to stunt the ability to finance and grow rus-—the russian military. we’re going to impose major—and we’re going to impair their ability to compete in a high-tech 21st century economy. we’ve already seen the impact of our actions on russia’s currency, the ruble, which early today hit its weakest level ever—ever in history. and the russian stock market plunged today. the russian government’s borrowing rate spiked by over 15 percent. in today’s actions, we have now sanctioned russian banks that together hold around $1 trillion in assets. we’ve cut off russia’s largest bank—a bank that holds more than one third of russia’s banking assets by itself—cut it off from the us financial system. and today, we’re also blocking four more major banks. that means every asset they have in america will be frozen. this includes v.t.b., the second-largest bank in russia, which has $250 billion in assets. as promised, we’re also adding names to the list of russian elites and their family members that are sanctioning—that we’re sanctioning as well. as i said on tuesday, these are people who personally gain from the kremlin’s policies and they should share in the pain. we will keep up this drumbeat of those designations against corrupt billionaires in the days ahead. on tuesday, we stopped the russian government from raising money from us or european investors. now, we’re going to apply the same restrictions to russia’s largest state-owned enterprises—companies with assets that exceed $1.4 trillion. some of the most powerful impacts of our actions will come over time as we squeeze russia’s access to finance and technology for strategic sectors of its economy and degrade its industrial capacity for years to come. between our actions and those of our allies and partners, we estimate that we’ll cut off more than half of russia’s high-tech imports. it will strike a blow to their ability to continue to modernize their military. it’ll degrade their aerospace industry, including their space program. it will hurt their ability to build ships, reducing their ability to compete economically. and it will be a major hit to putin’s long-term strategic ambitions. and we’re preparing to do more. in addition to the economic penalties we’re imposing, we’re also taking steps to defend our nato allies, particularly in the east. tomorrow, nato will convene a summit—we’ll be there—to bring together the leaders of 30 allied nations and close partners to affirm our solidarity and to map out the next steps we will take to further strengthen all aspects of our nato alliance. although we provided over $650 million in defensive assistance to ukraine just this year—this last year, let me say it again: our forces are not and will not be engaged in the conflict with russia in ukraine. our forces are not going to europe to fight in ukraine but to defend our nato allies and reassure those allies in the east. as i made crystal clear, the united states will defend every inch of nato territory with the full force of american power. and the good news is: nato is more united and more determined than ever. there is no doubt—no doubt that the united states and every nato ally will meet our article 5 commitments, which says that an attack on one is an attack on all. over the past few weeks, i ordered thousands of additional forces to germany and poland as part of our commitment to nato. on tuesday, in response to russia’s aggressive action, including its troop presence in belarus and the black sea, i’ve authorized the deployment of ground and air forces already stationed in europe to nato’s eastern flank allies: estonia, latvia, lithuania, poland, and romania. our allies have also been stepping up, adding—the other allies, the rest of nato—adding their own forces and capabilities to ensure our collective defense. and today, within hours of russia’s unleashing its assault, nato came together and authorized and activated—an activation of response plans. this will enable nato’s high-readiness forces to deploy and—when and where they’re needed to protect our nato allies on the eastern boundaries of europe. and now i’m authorizing additional us forces and capabilities to deploy to germany as part of nato’s response, including some of us-based forces that the department of defense placed on standby weeks ago. i’ve also spoken with defense secretary austin and chairman of the joint chiefs, general milley, about preparations for additional moves should they become necessary to protect our nato allies and support the greatest military alliance in the history of the world—nato. as we respond, my administration is using the tools—every tool at our disposal to protect american families and businesses from rising prices at the gas pump. you know, we’re taking active steps to bring down the costs. and american oil and gas companies should not—should not exploit this moment to hike their prices to raise profits. you know, in our sanctions package, we specifically designed to allow energy payments to continue. we are closely monitoring energy supplies for any disruption. we have been coordinating with major oil producing and consuming countries toward our common interest to secure global energy supplies. we are actively working with countries around the world to elevate [evaluate] a collective release from the strategic petroleum reserves of major energy-consuming countries. and the united states will release additional barrels of oil as conditions warrant. i know this is hard and that americans are already hurting. i will do everything in my power to limit the pain the american people are feeling at the gas pump. this is critical to me. but this aggression cannot go unanswered. if it did, the consequences for america would be much worse. america stands up to bullies. we stand up for freedom. this is who we are. let me also repeat the warning i made last week: if russia pursues cyberattacks against our companies, our critical infrastructure, we are prepared to respond. for months, we have been working closely with our private—with the private sector to harden their cyber defenses, sharpen our ability to respond to russian cyberattacks as well. i spoke late last night to president zelenskyy of ukraine and i assured him that the united states, together with our allies and partners in europe, will support the ukrainian people as they defend their country. we’ll provide humanitarian relief to ease their suffering. and in the early days of this conflict, russian propaganda outlets will keep trying to hide the truth and claim success for its military operation against a made-up threat. but history has shown time and again how swift gains in territory eventually give way to grinding occupations, acts of mass civil—mass civil disobedience, and strategic dead-ends. the next few weeks and months will be hard on the people of ukraine. putin has unleashed a great pain on them. but the ukrainian people have known 30 years of independence, and they have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backwards. this is a dangerous moment for all of europe, for the freedom around the world. putin has a—has committed an assault on the very principles that uphold global peace. but now the entire world sees clearly what putin and his kremlin—and his kremlin allies are really all about. this was never about genuine security concerns on their part. it was always about naked aggression, about putin’s desire for empire by any means necessary—by bullying russia’s neighbors through coercion and corruption, by changing borders by force, and, ultimately, by choosing a war without a cause. putin’s actions betray his sinister vision for the future of our world—one where nations take what they want by force. but it is a vision that the united states and freedom-loving nations everywhere will oppose with every tool of our considerable power. the united states and our allies and partners will emerge from this stronger, more united, more determined, and more purposeful. and putin’s aggression against ukraine will end up costing russia dearly—economically and strategically. we will make sure of that. putin will be a pariah on the international stage. any nation that countenances russia’s naked aggression against ukraine will be stained by association. when the history of this era is written, putin’s choice to make a totally unjustifiable war on ukraine will have left russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger. liberty, democracy, human dignity—these are the forces far more powerful than fear and oppression. they cannot be extinguished by tyrants like putin and his armies. they cannot be erased by people—from people’s hearts and hopes by any amount of violence and intimidation. they endure. and in the contest between democracy and autocracy, between sovereignty and subjugation, make no mistake: freedom will prevail. god bless the people of a free and democratic ukraine. and may god protect our troops. associated press, zeke. i heard the first part: do i have any plans to speak with putin at this point. and what? well, it’s a large conflict already. the way we’re going to assure it’s not going to spiral to a larger conflict is by providing all the forces needed in the eastern european nations that are members of nato. nato is more united than it’s ever been. and i have no plans to talk with putin. wall street journal, tarina [tarini]. the sanctions that we have proposed on all their banks is of equal consequence—maybe more consequence than swift—number one. number two, it is always an option. but right now, that’s not the position that the rest of europe wishes to take. cecilia ve-—vega, abc. i have no idea what he’s threatening. i know what he has done, number one. and number two, no one expected the sanctions to prevent anything from happening. that has to sh-—this is going to take time. and we have to show resolve so he knows what’s coming and so the people of russia know what he’s brought on them. that’s what this is all about. this is going to take time. it’s not going to occur—he’s going to say, “oh my god, these sanctions are coming. i’m going to stand down.” he’s going to test the resolve of the west to see if we stay together. and we will. we will and it will impose significant costs on him. (points to reporter.) yes. first of all, there’s no doubt that when a major nuclear power attacks and invades another country that the world is going to respond and markets are going to respond all over the world. so, there’s no doubt about that, number one. number two, the notion that this is going to last for a long time is highly unlikely, as long as we continue to stay resolved in imposing the sanctions we’re going to impose on russia, period. what’s your next question? i’m sorry. at the time, he was—i made it clear he was an adversary, and i said he was “worthy.” i didn’t underestimate him. and i’ve read most of everything he’s written. did you read the—i shouldn’t sa-—i’m not being a wise guy. the—you heard the speech he made—almost an hour’s worth of speeches—why he was going into ukraine. he has much larger ambitions in ukraine. he wants to, in fact, reestablish the former soviet union. that’s what this is about. and i think that his—his ambitions are—are completely contrary to the place where the rest of the world has arrived. yes. russian bullets, missiles, and tanks in ukraine. yes, i am. i didn’t say sanctions couldn’t stop him. yes, but the threat of the sanctions and imposing the sanctions and seeing the effect of the sanctions are two different things. they’re two different things. and we’re now going to—he’s going to begin to see the effect of the sanctions. because it will so weaken his country that he’ll have to make a very, very difficult choices of whether to continue to move toward being a second-rate power or, in fact, respond. it’s not a bluff; it’s on the table. yes. specifically, the sanctions we’ve imposed exceed swift. the sanctions we imposed exceed anything that’s ever been done. the sanctions we imposed have generated two thirds of the world joining us. they are profound sanctions. let’s have a conversation in another month or so to see if they’re working. yes. there is a complete rupture right now in us-russian relations if they continue on this path that they’re on. and in terms of a cold war, that depends. you have the vast majority of the rest of the world in total opposition to what he’s doing—from asia to south america to europe to acr-—around the world. and so, it’s going to be a cold day for russia. the idea—you don’t see a whole lot of people coming to his defense. i’m not prepared to comment on that at the moment. wait. no, no. (points to reporter.) yeah. no, no, no. he’s had his hand up a long time. well, if he did move into nato countries, he will be involved—we will be involved. the only thing that i’m convinced of is: if we don’t stop now, he’ll be emboldened. if we don’t move against him now with these significant sanctions, he will be emboldened. look, you know, every—well, anyway. i’m sorry, i can’t hear you. does the defense department of the united states — we’re going to be—we’re in consultation with—with india today. we haven’t resolved that completely. okay, thank you all very much. thank you. hello, poland! one of our great allies. president duda, prime minister — mr. prime minister, mr. mayor, and to all the former ministers and presidents, as well as mayors and polish political leaders from all across the country: thank you for welcoming me back to poland. you know, it was nearly one year ago, nearly one year ago i spoke at the royal castle here in warsaw, just weeks after vladimir putin had unleashed his murderous assault on ukraine. the largest land war in europe since world war two had begun. and the principles that had been the cornerstone of peace, prosperity, and stability on this planet for more than 75 years were at risk of being shattered. one year ago, the world was bracing for the fall of kyiv. well, i have just come from a visit to kyiv, and i can report: kyiv stands strong! kyiv stands proud. it stands tall. and most important, it stands free. when russia invaded, it wasn’t just ukraine being tested. the whole world faced a test for the ages. europe was being tested. america was being tested. nato was being tested. all democracies were being tested. and the questions we faced were as simple as they were profound. would we respond or would we look the other way? would we be strong or would we be weak? would be — we would — would we be — all of our allies — would be united or divided? one year later, we know the answer. we did respond. we would be strong. we would be united. and the world would not look the other way. we also faced fundamental questions about the commitment to the most basic of principles. would we stand up for the sovereignty of nations? would we stand up for the right of people to live free from naked aggression? would we stand up for democracy? one year later, we know the answers. yes, we would stand up for sovereignty. and we did. yes, we would stand up for the right of people to live free from aggression. and we did. and we would stand up for democracy. and we did. and yesterday, i had the honor to stand with president zelenskyy in kyiv to declare that we will keep standing up for these same things no matter what. when president putin ordered his tanks to roll into ukraine, he thought we would roll over. he was wrong. the ukrainian people are too brave. america, europe, a coalition of nations from the atlantic to the pacific — we were too unified. democracy was too strong. instead of an easy victory he perceived and predicted, putin left with burnt-out tanks and russia’s forces in delay — in disarray. he thought he’d get the finlandization of nato. instead, he got the natoization of finland — and sweden. he thought nato would fracture and divide. instead, nato is more united and more unified than ever — than ever before. he thought he could weaponize energy to crack your resolve — europe’s resolve. instead, we’re working together to end europe’s dependence on russian fossil fuels. he thought autocrats like himself were tough and leaders of democracies were soft. and then, he met the iron will of america and the nations everywhere that refused to accept a world governed by fear and force. he found himself at war with a nation led by a man whose courage would be forged in fire and steel: president zelenskyy. president putin — president putin is confronted with something today that he didn’t think was possible a year ago. the democracies of the world have grown stronger, not weaker. but the autocrats of the world have grown weaker, not stronger. because in the moments of great upheaval and uncertainty, that knowing what you stand for is most important, and knowing who stands with you makes all the difference. the people of poland know that. you know that. in fact, you know — you know it better than anyone here in poland. because that’s what solidarity means. through partition and oppression, when the beautiful city was destroyed after the warsaw uprising, during decades under the iron fist of communist rule, poland endured because you stood together. that’s how the brave leaders of the opposition and the people of belarus continue to fight for their democracy. that’s how the resolve of moldovan people — (applause) — resolve of the people of moldova to live in freedom gained them independence and put them on the path to eu membership. president sandu is here today. i’m not sure where she is. but i’m proud to stand with you and the freedom-loving people of moldova. give her a round of applause. one year into this war, putin no longer doubts the strength of our coalition. but he still doubts our conviction. he doubts our staying power. he doubts our continued support for ukraine. he doubts whether nato can remain unified. but there should be no doubt: our support for ukraine will not waver, nato will not be divided, and we will not tire. president putin’s craven lust for land and power will fail. and the ukrainian people’s love for their country will prevail. democracies of the world will stand guard over freedom today, tomorrow, and forever. for that’s what — that’s what’s at stake here: freedom. that’s the message i carried to kyiv yesterday, directly to the people of ukraine. when president zelenskyy said — he came to the united states in december — quote — he said this struggle will define the world and what our children and grandchildren — how they live, and then their children and grandchildren. he wasn’t only speaking about the children and grandchildren of ukraine. he was speaking about all of our children and grandchildren. yours and mine. we’re seeing again today what the people of poland and the people all across europe saw for decades: appetites of the autocrat cannot be appeased. they must be opposed. autocrats only understand one word: “no.” “no.” “no.” “no, you will not take my country.” “no, you will not take my freedom.” “no, you will not take my future.” and i’ll repeat tonight what i said last year in this same place: a dictator bent on rebuilding an empire will never be able to erase the people’s love of liberty. brutality will never grind down the will of the free. and ukraine — ukraine will never be a victory for russia. never. for free people refuse to live in a world of hopelessness and darkness. you know, this has been an extraordinary year in every sense. extraordinary brutality from russian forces and mercenaries. they have committed depravities, crimes against humanity, without shame or compunction. they’ve targeted civilians with death and destruction. used rape as a weapon of war. stolen ukrainian children in an attempt to — in an attempt to steal ukraine’s future. bombed train stations, maternity hospitals, schools, and orphanages. no one — no one can turn away their eyes from the atrocities russia is committing against the ukrainian people. it’s abhorrent. it’s abhorrent. but extraordinarily, as well, has been the response of the ukrainian people and the world. one year after the bombs began to fall and russian tanks rolled into ukraine, ukraine is still independent and free. from kherson to kharkiv, ukrainian fighters have reclaimed their land. in more than 50 percent of the territory russia held last year, the blue and the yellow flag of ukraine proudly waves once again. president zelenskyy still leads a democratically elected government that represents the will of the ukrainian people. and the world has already voted multiple times, including in the united nations general assembly, to condemn russia’s aggression and support a just peace. each time in the u.n., that vote has been overwhelming. in october, 143 nations in the united nations condemned russia’s illegal annexation. only four — four in the entire u.n. — voted with russia. four. so, tonight, i speak once more to the people of russia. the united states and the nations of europe do not seek to control or destroy russia. the west was not plotting to attack russia, as putin said today. and millions of russian citizens who only want to live in peace with their neighbors are not the enemy. this war was never a necessity; it’s a tragedy. president putin chose this war. every day the war continues is his choice. he could end the war with a word. it’s simple. if russia stopped invading ukraine, it would end the war. if ukraine stopped defending itself against russia, it would be the end of ukraine. that’s why, together, we’re making sure ukraine can defend itself. the united states has assembled a worldwide coalition of more than 50 nations to get critical weapons and supplies to the brave ukrainian fighters on the frontlines. air defense systems, artillery, ammunition, tanks, and armored vehicles. the european union and its member states have stepped up with unprecedented commitment to ukraine, not just in security assistance, but economic, and humanitarian, refugee assistance, and so much more. to all of you here tonight: take a moment. and i’m serious when i say this: turn on and look — turn around and look at one another. look at what you’ve done so far. poland is hosting more than 1.5 million refugees from this war. god bless you. poland’s generosity, your willingness to open your hearts and your homes, is extraordinary. and the american people are united in our resolve as well. all across my country, in big cities and small towns, ukrainian flags fly from american homes. over the past year, democrats and republicans in our united states congress have come together to stand for freedom. that’s who americans are, and that’s what americans do. the world is also coming together to address the global fallout from president putin’s war. putin tried to starve the world, blocking the ports in the black sea to stop ukraine from exporting its grain, exacerbating the global food crisis that hit developing nations in africa especially hard. instead, the united states and the g7 and partners around the world answered the call with historic commitments to address the crisis and to bolster global food supplies. and this week, my wife, jill biden, is traveling to africa to help bring attention to this critical issue. our commitment is to the people of ukraine and the future of ukraine — a ukraine that’s free, sovereign, and democratic. that was the dream of those who declared ukraine’s independence more than 30 years ago — who led the orange revolution and the revolution of dignity; who braved ice and fire on the maidan and the heavenly hundred who died there; and those who continue still to root out kremlin’s efforts to corrupt, coerce, and control. it’s a dream for those ukrainian patriots who have fought for years against russia’s aggressions in the donbas and the heroes who have given everything, given their lives, in the service of their beloved ukraine. i was honored to visit their memorial in kyiv yesterday to pay tribute to the sacrifice of those who lost their lives, standing alongside president zelenskyy. the united states and our partners stand with ukraine’s teachers, its hospital staff, its emergency responders, the workers in cities across ukraine who are fighting to keep the power on in the face of russia’s cruel bombardment. we stand with the millions of refugees of this war who have found a welcome in europe and the united states, particularly here in poland. ordinary people all across europe did whatever they could to help and continue to do so. polish businesses, civil society, cultural leaders — including the first lady of poland, who is here tonight — have led with the heart and determination, showcasing all that’s good about the human spirit. madam first lady, we love you. thank you all. i’ll never forget, last year, visiting with refugees from ukraine who had just arrived in warsaw, seeing their faces exhausted and afraid — holding their children so close, worrying they might never see their fathers, their husbands, their brothers or sisters again. in that darkest moment of their lives, you, the people of poland, offered them safety and light. you embraced them. you literally embraced them. i watched. i watched the looks on their faces. meanwhile, together we have made sure that russia is paying the price for its abuses. we continue to maintain the largest sanctions regime ever imposed on any country in history. and we’re going to announce more sanctions this week together with our partners. we’ll hold accountable those who are responsible for this war. and we will seek justice for the war crimes and crimes against humanity continuing to be committed by the russians. you know, there is much for us to be proud of over the — all that we have achieved together this past year. but we have to be honest and cleared-eyed as we look at the year ahead. the defense of freedom is not the work of a day or of a year. it’s always difficult. it’s always important. as ukraine continues to defend itself against the russian onslaught and launch counter-offensives of its own, there will continue to be hard and very bitter days, victories and tragedies. but ukraine is steeled for the fight ahead. and the united states, together with our allies and partners, are going to continue to have ukraine’s back as it defends itself. next year, i will host every member of nato for our 2024 summit in the united states. together, we’ll celebrate the 75th anniversary of the strongest defensive alliance in the history of the world — nato. and let there be no doubt, the commitment of the united states to our nato alliance and article 5 is rock solid. and every member of nato knows it. and russia knows it as well. an attack against one is an attack against all. it’s a sacred oath. a sacred oath to defend every inch of nato territory. over the past year, the united states has come together with our allies and partners in an extraordinary coalition to stand against russian aggression. but the work in front of us is not just what we’re against, it’s about what we’re for. what kind of world do we want to build? we need to take the strength and capacity of this coalition and apply it to lifting up — lifting up the lives of people everywhere, improving health, growing prosperity, preserving the planet, building peace and security, treating everyone with dignity and respect. that’s our responsibility. the democracies of the world have to deliver it for our people. as we gather tonight, the world, in my view, is at an — at an inflection point. the decisions we make over the next five years or so are going to determine and shape our lives for decades to come. that’s true for americans. it’s true for the people of the world. and while decisions are ours to make now, the principles and the stakes are eternal. a choice between chaos and stability. between building and destroying. between hope and fear. between democracy that lifts up the human spirit and the brutal hand of the dictator who crushes it. between nothing less than limitation and possibilities, the kind of possibilities that come when people who live not in captivity but in freedom. freedom. freedom. there is no sweeter word than freedom. there is no nobler goal than freedom. there is no higher aspiration than freedom. americans know that, and you know it. and all that we do now must be done so our children and grandchildren will know it as well. freedom. the enemy of the tyrant and the hope of the brave and the truth of the ages. freedom. stand with us. we will stand with you. let us move forward with faith and conviction and with an abiding commitment to be allies not of darkness, but of light. not of oppression, but of liberation. not of captivity, but, yes, of freedom. may god bless you all. may god protect our troops. and may god bless the heroes of ukraine and all those who defend freedom around the world. thank you, poland. thank you, thank you, thank you for what you’re doing. god bless you all. good afternoon. earlier today, i was briefed by our senior military and national security leaders on the status of the drawdown of u.s. forces and allied forces in afghanistan. when i announced our drawdown in april, i said we would be out by september, and we’re on track to meet that target. our military mission in afghanistan will conclude on august 31st. the drawdown is proceeding in a secure and orderly way, prioritizing the safety of our troops as they depart. our military commanders advised me that once i made the decision to end the war, we needed to move swiftly to conduct the main elements of the drawdown. and in this context, speed is safety. and thanks to the way in which we have managed our withdrawal, no one—no one u.s. forces or any forces have—have been lost. conducting our drawdown differently would have certainly come with an increased risk of safety to our personnel. to me, those risks were unacceptable. and there was never any doubt that our military would perform this task efficiently and with the highest level of professionalism. that’s what they do. and the same is true of our nato allies and partners who have supported—we are supporting, and supporting us as well, as they conclude their retrograde. i want to be clear: the u.s. military mission in afghanistan continues through the end of august. we remain—we retain personnel and capacities in the country, and we maintain some authority—excuse me, the same authority under which we’ve been operating for some time. as i said in april, the united states did what we went to do in afghanistan: to get the terrorists who attacked us on 9/11 and to deliver justice to osama bin laden, and to degrade the terrorist threat to keep afghanistan from becoming a base from which attacks could be continued against the united states. we achieved those objectives. that’s why we went. we did not go to afghanistan to nation-build. and it’s the right and the responsibility of the afghan people alone to decide their future and how they want to run their country. together, with our nato allies and partners, we have trained and equipped over three hu-—nearly 300,000 current serving members of the military—of the afghan national security force, and many beyond that who are no longer serving. add to that, hundreds of thousands more afghan national defense and security forces trained over the last two decades. we provided our afghan partners with all the tools—let me emphasize: all the tools, training, and equipment of any modern military. we provided advanced weaponry. and we’re going to continue to provide funding and equipment. and we’ll ensure they have the capacity to maintain their air force. but most critically, as i stressed in my meeting just two weeks ago with president ghani and chairman abdullah, afghan leaders have to come together and drive toward a future that the afghan people want and they deserve. in our meeting, i also assured ghani that u.s. support for the people of afghanistan will endure. we will continue to provide civilian and humanitarian assistance, including speaking out for the rights of women and girls. i intend to maintain our diplomatic presence in afghanistan, and we are coordinating closely with our international partners in order to continue to secure the international airport. and we’re going to engage in a determined diplomacy to pursue peace and a peace agreement that will end this senseless violence. i’ve asked secretary of state blinken and our special representative for afghanistan reconciliation to work vigorously with the parties in afghanistan, as well as the regional and international stakeholders to support a negotiated solution. to be clear—to be clear: countries in the region have an essential role to play in supporting a peaceful settlement. we’ll work with them, and they should help step up their efforts as well. we’re going to continue to work for the release of detained americans, including mark—excuse me—fre– frerichs—i want to pronounce the name correctly; i mis-—i misspoke—so that he can return to his family safely. we’re also going to continue to make sure that we take on the afghan nationals who work side-by-side with u.s. forces, including interpreters and translators—since we’re no longer going to have military there after this; we’re not going to need them and they have no jobs—who are also going to be vital to our efforts so they—and they’ve been very vital—and so their families are not exposed to danger as well. we’ve already dramatically accelerated the procedure time for special immigrant visas to bring them to the united states. since i was inaugurated on january 20th, we’ve already approved 2,500 special immigrant visas to come to the united states. up to now, fewer than half have exercised their right to do that. half have gotten on aircraft and com—commercial flights and come, and the other half believe they want to stay—at least thus far. we’re working closely with congress to change the authorization legislation so that we can streamline the process of approving those visas. and those who have stood up for the operation to physically relocate thousands of afghans and their families before the u.s. military mission concludes so that, if they choose, they can wait safely outside of afghanistan while their u.s. visas are being processed. the operation has identified u.s. facilities outside of the continental united states, as well as in third countries, to host our afghan allies, if they ch-—if they so choose. and, starting this month, we’re going to begin to re-—re-—reloc-—we’re going to begin relocation flights for afghanistan siv applicants and their families who choose to leave. we have a point person in the white house and at the state department-led task force coordinating all these efforts. but our message to those women and men is clear: there is a home for you in the united states if you so choose, and we will stand with you just as you stood with us. when i made the decision to end the u.s. military involvement in afghanistan, i judged that it was not in the national interest of the united states of america to continue fighting this war indefinitely. i made the decision with clear eyes, and i am briefed daily on the battlefield updates. but for those who have argued that we should stay just six more months or just one more year, i ask them to consider the lessons of recent history. in 2011, the nato allies and partners agreed that we would end our combat mission in 2014. in 2014, some argued, “one more year.” so we kept fighting, and we kept taking casualties. in 2015, the same. and on and on. nearly 20 years of experience has shown us that the current security situation only confirms that “just one more year” of fighting in afghanistan is not a solution but a recipe for being there indefinitely. it’s up to afghans to make the decision about the future of their country. others are more direct. their argument is that we should stay with the afghan—in afghanistan indefinitely. in doing so, they point to the fact that we—we have not taken losses in this last year, so they claim that the cost of just maintaining the status quo is minimal. but that ignores the reality and the facts that already presented on the ground in afghanistan when i took office: the taliban was at its strongest mil-—is at its strongest militarily since 2001. the number of u.s. forces in afghanistan had been reduced to a bare minimum. and the united states, in the last administration, made an agreement that the—with the taliban to remove all our forces by may 1 of this past—of this year. that’s what i inherited. that agreement was the reason the taliban had ceased major attacks against u.s. forces. if, in april, i had instead announced that the united states was going to back—going back on that agreement made by the last administration—[that] the united states and allied forces would remain in afghanistan for the foreseeable future—the taliban would have again begun to target our forces. the status quo was not an option. staying would have meant u.s. troops taking casualties; american men and women back in the middle of a civil war. and we would have run the risk of having to send more troops back into afghanistan to defend our remaining troops. once that agreement with the taliban had been made, staying with a bare minimum force was no longer possible. so let me ask those who wanted us to stay: how many more—how many thousands more of america’s daughters and sons are you willing to risk? how long would you have them stay? already we have members of our military whose parents fought in afghanistan 20 years ago. would you send their children and their grandchildren as well? would you send your own son or daughter? after 20 years—a trillion dollars spent training and equipping hundreds of thousands of afghan national security and defense forces, 2,448 americans killed, 20,722 more wounded, and untold thousands coming home with unseen trauma to their mental health—i will not send another generation of americans to war in afghanistan with no reasonable expectation of achieving a different outcome. the united states cannot afford to remain tethered to policies creating a response to a world as it was 20 years ago. we need to meet the threats where they are today. today, the terrorist threat has metastasized beyond afghanistan. so, we are repositioning our resources and adapting our counterterrorism posture to meet the threats where they are now significantly higher: in south asia, the middle east, and africa. but make no mistake: our military and intelligence leaders are confident they have the capabilities to protect the homeland and our interests from any resurgent terrorist challenge emerging or emanating from afghanistan. we are developing a counterterrorism over-the-horizon capability that will allow us to keep our eyes firmly fixed on any direct threats to the united states in the region, and act quickly and decisively if needed. and we also need to focus on shoring up america’s core strengths to meet the strategic competition with china and other nations that is really going to determine—determine our future. we have to defeat covid-19 at home and around the world, make sure we’re better prepared for the next pandemic or biological threat. we need to establish international norms for cyberspace and the use of emergenc-—emerging technologies. we need to take concerted action to fight existential threats of climate change. and we will be more formidable to our adversaries and competitors over the long run if we fight the battles of the next 20 years, not the last 20 years. finally, i want to recognize the incredible sacrifice and dedication that the u.s. military and civilian personnel, serving alongside our allies and partners, have made over the last two decades in afghanistan. i want to honor the significance of what they’ve accomplished and the great personal risk they encountered and the incredible cost to their families: pursuing the terrorist threat in some of the most unforgiving terrain on the planet—and i’ve been almost throughout that entire country; ensuring there hasn’t been another attack on the homeland from afghanistan for the last 20 years; taking out bin laden. i want to thank you all for your service and the dedication to the mission so many of you have given, and to the sacrifices that you and your families have made over the long course of this war. we’ll never forget those who gave the last full measure of devotion for their country in afghanistan, nor those whose lives have been immeasurably altered by wounds sustained in service to their country. we’re ending america’s longest war, but we’ll always, always honor the bravery of the american patriots who served in it. may god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. thank you. no, it is not. because you—the afghan troops have 300,000 well-equipped—as well-equipped as any army in the world—and an air force against something like 75,000 taliban. it is not inevitable. you—is that a serious question? no, i do not. no, i do not trust the taliban. it’s a—it’s a silly question. do i trust the taliban? no. but i trust the capacity of the afghan military, who is better trained, better equipped, and more re-—more competent in terms of conducting war.yes, ma’am. you know my record. i can tell by the way you asked the question. i opposed permanently having american forces in afghanistan. i argued, from the beginning, as you may recall—it came to light after the administration was over, last—our administration—no nation has ever unified afghanistan. no nation. empires have gone there and not done it. the focus we had—and i strongly support it—and you may remember i physically went to afghanistan. i was up in that pass where osama bin laden was—allegedly escaped or—out of harm’s way. we went for two reasons: one, to bring osama bin laden to the gates of hell, as i said at the time. the second reason was to eliminate al qaeda’s capacity to deal with more attacks on the united states from that territory. we accomplished both of those objectives—period. that’s what i believed, from the beginning, why we should be and why we should have gone to afghanistan. that job had been over for some time. and that’s why i believe that this is the right decision and, quite frankly, overdue. that is not true. that is not true. they did not—they didn’t—did not reach that conclusion. the afghan government and leadership has to come together. they clearly have the capacity to sustain the government in place. the question is: will they generate the kind of cohesion to do it? it’s not a question of whether they have the capacity. they have the capacity. they have the forces. they have the equipment. the question is: will they do it? and i want to make clear what i made clear to ghani: that we are not going just sus-—walk away and not sustain their ability to maintain that force. we are. we’re going to also work to make sure we help them in terms of everything from food necessities and other things in—in the region. but—but, there’s not a conclusion that, in fact, they cannot defeat the taliban. i believe the only way there’s going to be—this is now joe biden, not the intelligence community—the only way there’s ultimately going to be peace and security in afghanistan is that they work out a modus vivendi with the taliban and they make a judgment as to how they can make peace. and the likelihood there’s going to be one unified government in afghanistan controlling the whole country is highly unlikely. look, you’ve said two things—one, that if it could result in a civil war—that’s different than the taliban succeeding, number one. number two, the question of what will be done is going to be implicated—is going to implicate the entire region as well. there’s a number of countries who have a grave concern about what’s going to happen in afghanistan relative to their security. the question is: how much of a threat to the united states of america and to our allies is whatever results in terms of a government or an agreement? that’s when that judgement will be made. none whatsoever. zero. what you had is—you had entire brigades breaking through the gates of our embassy—six, if i’m not mistaken. the taliban is not the south—the north vietnamese army. they’re not—they’re not remotely comparable in terms of capability. there’s going to be no circumstance where you see people being lifted off the roof of an embassy in the—of the united states from afghanistan. it is not at all comparable. i’ll take him and then i’ll—and then i’ll go—i’ll go to the other side. hang on a second. well, first of all, the mission hasn’t failed, yet. there is in afghanistan—in all parties, there’s been corruption. the question is, can there be an agreement on unity of purpose? what is the objective? for example, it started off—there were going to be negotiations between the taliban and the afghan national security forces and the afghan government. that—that of—it didn’t come to—it didn’t come to fruition. so the question now is, where do they go from here? that—the jury is still out. but the likelihood there’s going to be the taliban overrunning everything and owning the whole country is highly unlikely. yes, ma’am. no. no, no, no. it’s up to the people of afghanistan to decide on what government they want, not us to impose the government on them. no country has ever been able to do that. keep in mind, as a student of history, as i’m sure you are, never has afghanistan been a united country, not in all of its history. not in all of its history. no, there’s no “mission accomplished.” the mission was accomplished in that we get—got osama bin laden, and terrorism is not emanating from that part of the world. well, much of it has already happened. there’s already been people—about a thousand people have gotten on aircraft and come home—come to the united states already on commercial aircraft. so, as i said, there’s over 2,500 people that as—from january to now, have gotten those visas. and only half decided that they wanted to leave. the point is that i think the whole process has to be speeded up, period, in terms of being able to get these visas. because the law doesn’t allow that to happen. and that’s why we’re asking the congress to consider changing the law. but in the meantime, we can guarantee their safety, if they wish to leave, by taking them to third countries and/or, while the wait is taking place, to come to—to—and hopefully, while they’re waiting there, to be able to bring them back to the united states, if that’s what they choose to do. they are very concerned, with good reason. when i was in afghanistan—i’ve been there a number of times—i remember being in a school outside and—and, by the way, the schools in afghanistan are not fundamentally unlike schools in the west coast, where they have, you know, a—an area in the middle that is sort of like—it looks like a playground and single-story buildings connected around it. and i remember saying to—speaking to a group of young women—i guess they were roughly—don’t hold me to this—they look like they’d be 14, 15 years old. and they’re in school, and there’s a tiered classroom with single light bulbs hanging from the ceiling, as i know you know. and i said, “you know, the united states came here to make sure that we got this terrorist, osama bin laden, and that terrorists didn’t amass again to—to go after our country. and then we’re going to have to leave.” and a young woman said, “you can’t leave. you can’t leave.” it was—it was heartbreaking. “you can’t leave,” she said. “i want to be a doctor. i want to be a doctor. i want to be a doctor. if you leave, i’ll never be able to be a doctor.” well, that’s why we spent so much time and money training the afghan security forces to do the work of defending that. if every work — well, anyway—so, yes, i’m aware. i’m going to take one more question. relative to the training and capacity of the ansf and the training of the federal police, they’re not even close in terms of their capacity. i was making the point—the point was that here we were; i was—the argument is, “well, we could stay because no one was dying. no americans are being shot. so why leave?” once the agreement was made by the last administration that we were going to leave by may 1st, it was very clear that a taliban that had always been a problem was even a more sophisticated problem than they were than before. not more sophisticated than the ansf, the government. more than they were. the point being that it would have increased the prospect that they would have been able to take more lives of americans if they decided we weren’t going to go after them. that was the point i was making. thank you all so very much. thank you. thank you. (applause.) thank you. thank you. good to be back. and mitch and chuck will understand it’s good to be almost home, down the hall. anyway, thank you all. madam speaker, madam vice president—(applause)—no president has ever said those words from this podium. no president has ever said those words, and it’s about time. (applause.) first lady—(applause)—i’m her husband; second gentleman; chief justice; members of the united states congress and the cabinet; distinguished guests; my fellow americans: while the setting tonight is familiar, this gathering is just a little bit different—a reminder of the extraordinary times we’re in. throughout our history, presidents have come to this chamber to speak to congress, to the nation, and to the world to declare war, to celebrate peace, to announce new plans and possibilities. tonight, i come to talk about crisis and opportunity, about rebuilding the nation, revitalizing our democracy, and winning the future for america. i stand here tonight, one day shy of the 100th day of my administration—100 days since i took the oath of office and lifted my hand off our family bible and inherited a nation—we all did—that was in crisis. the worst pandemic in a century. the worst economic crisis since the great depression. the worst attack on our democracy since the civil war. now, after just 100 days, i can report to the nation: america is on the move again—(applause)—turning peril into possibility, crisis to opportunity, setbacks into strength. we all know life can knock us down. but in america, we never, ever, ever stay down. americans always get up. today, that’s what we’re doing: america is rising anew, choosing hope over fear, truth over lies, and light over darkness. after 100 days of rescue and renewal, america is ready for takeoff, in my view. we’re working again, dreaming again, discovering again, and leading the world again. we have shown each other and the world that there’s no quit in america—none. one hundred days ago, america’s house was on fire. we had to act. and thanks to the extraordinary leadership of speaker pelosi; malor-—majority leader schumer; and the overwhelming support of the american people—democrats, independents, and republicans—we did act. together we passed the american rescue plan—one of the most consequential rescue packages in american history. we’re already seeing the results. (applause.) we’re already seeing the results. after i promised we’d get 100 million covid-19 vaccine shots into people’s arms in 100 days, we will have provided over 220 million covid shots in those 100 days. (applause.) thanks to all the help of all of you, we’re marshalling—with your help, everyone’s help—we’re marshalling every federal resource. we’ve gotten vaccines to nearly 40,000 pharmacies and over 700 community health centers where the poorest of the poor can be reached. we’re setting up community vaccination sites, developing mobile units to get to hard-to-reach communities. today, 90 percent of americans now live within five miles of a vaccination site. everyone over the age of 16—everyone is now eligible to get vaccinated right now, right away. (applause.) go get vaccinated, america. go and get the vaccination. they’re available. you’re eligible now. when i was sworn in on january 20th, less than 1 percent of the seniors in america were fully vaccinated against covid-19. one hundred days later, 70 percent of seniors in america over 65 are protected—fully protected. senior deaths from covid-19 are down 80 percent since january—down 80 percent because of all of you. and more than half of all the adults in america have gotten at least one shot. at a mass vaccination center in glendale, arizona, i asked a nurse—i said, “what’s it like?” she looked at me and she said, “it’s like every shot is giving a dose of hope”—was the phrase. “a dose of hope.” a dose of hope for an educator in florida who has a child suffering from an autoimmune disease—wrote to me, said she’s worried—that she was worrying about bringing the virus home. she said she then got vaccinated at a—at a large site, in her car. she said she sat in her car, when she got vaccinated, and just cried—cried out of joy and cried out of relief. parents see the smiles on their kids’ faces, for those who are able to go back to school because the teachers and school bus drivers and cafeteria workers have been vaccinated. grandparents hugging their children and grandchildren instead of pressing hands against a window to say goodbye. it means everything. those things mean everything. you know, there’s still—you all know it; you know it better than any group of americans—there’s still more work to do to beat this virus. we can’t let our guard down. but tonight i can say it: because of you, the american people, our progress these past 100 days against one of the worst pandemics in history has been one of the greatest logistical achievements—logistical achievements this country has ever seen. what else have we done in those first 100 days? we kept our commitment—democrats and republicans—of sending $1,400 rescue checks to 85 percent of american households. we’ve already sent more than one—160 million checks out the door. it’s making the difference. you all know it when you go home. for many people, it’s making all the difference in the world. a single mom in texas who wrote to me, she said she couldn’t work, but she said the relief check put food on the table and saved her and her son from eviction from their apartment. a grandmother in virginia who told me she immediately took her granddaughter to the eye doctor—something she said she put off for months because she didn’t have the money. one of the defining images, at least from my perspective, of this crisis has been cars lined up—cars lined up for miles. and not—not people who just barely ever start those cars—nice cars lined up for miles, waiting for a box of food to be put in their trunk. i don’t know about you, but i didn’t ever think i’d see that in america. and all of this is through no fault of their own. no fault of their own these people are in this position. that’s why the rescue plan is delivering food and nutrition assistance to millions of americans facing hunger, and hunger is down sharply already. we’re also providing rental assistance—you all know this, but the american people, i want to make sure they understand—keeping people from being evicted from their homes, providing loans to small businesses to reopen and keep their employees on the job. during these 100 days, an additional 800,000 americans enrolled in the affordable care act when i established the special sign-up period to do that—800,000 in that period. we’re making one of the largest one-time ever investments—ever—in improving healthcare for veterans. critical investments to address the opioid crisis. and, maybe most importantly, thanks to the american rescue plan, we’re on track to cut child poverty in america in half this year. (applause.) and in the process, while this was all going on, the economy created more than 1,300,000 new jobs in 100 days—more jobs in the first—(applause)—more jobs in the first 100 days than any president on record. the international monetary fund—(applause)—the international monetary fund is now estimating our economy will grow at a rate of more than 6 percent this year. that will be the fastest pace of economic growth in this country in nearly four decades. america is moving—moving forward—but we can’t stop now. we’re in competition with china and other countries to win the 21st century. we’re at a great inflection point in history. we have to do more than just build back better—i mean “build back.” we have to build back better. we have to compete more strenuously than we have. throughout our history, if you think about it, public investment and infrastructure has literally transformed america—our attitudes, as well as our opportunities. the transcontinental railroad, the interstate highways united two oceans and brought a totally new age of progress to the united states of america. universal public schools and college aid opened wide the doors of opportunity. scientific breakthroughs took us to the moon—now we’re on mars; discovering vaccines; gave us the internet and so much more. these are the investments we made together as one country, and investments that only the government was in a position to make. time and again, they propel us into the future. that’s why i proposed the american jobs plan—a once-in-a-generation investment in america itself. this is the largest jobs plan since world war two. it creates jobs to upgrade our transportation infrastructure; jobs modernizing our roads, bridges, highways; jobs building ports and airports, rail corridors, transit lines. it’s clean water. and, today, up to 10 million homes in america and more than 400,000 schools and childcare centers have pipes with lead in them, including in drinking water—a clear and present danger to our children’s health. the american jobs plan creates jobs replacing 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines so every american can drink clean water. (applause.) and in the process, it will create thousands and thousands of good-paying jobs. it creates jobs connecting every american with high-speed internet, including 35 percent of the rural america that still doesn’t have it. this is going to help our kids and our businesses succeed in the 21st-century economy. and i am asking the vice president to lead this effort, if she would — —because i know it will get done. (applause.) it creates jobs, building a modern power grid. our grids are vulnerable to storms, hacks, catastrophic failures—with tragic results, as we saw in texas and elsewhere during the winter storms. the american jobs plan will create jobs that will lay thousands of miles of transmission lines needed to build a resilient and fully clean grid. we can do that. (applause.) look, the american jobs plan will help millions of people get back to their jobs and back to their careers. two million women have dropped out of the workforce during this pandemic—two million. and too often because they couldn’t get the care they needed to care for their child or care for an elderly parent who needs help. eight hundred thousand families are on a medicare waiting list right now to get homecare for their aging parent or loved one with a disability. if you think it’s not important, check out in your own district. democrat or republican—democrat or republican voters, their great concern—almost as much as their children—is taking care of an elderly loved one who can’t be left alone. medicaid contemplated it, but this plan is going to help those families and create jobs for our caregivers with better wages and better benefits, continuing a cycle of growth. for too long, we’ve failed to use the most important word when it comes to meeting the climate crisis: “jobs.” jobs. jobs. (applause.) for me, when i think “climate change,” i think “jobs.” the american jobs plan will put engineers and construction workers to work building more energy-efficient buildings and homes. electrical workers—ibew members—installing 500,000 charging stations along our highways so we can own—(applause)—so we can own the electric car market. (applause.) farmers—farmers planting cover crops so they can reduce the carbon dioxide in the air and get paid for doing it. (applause.) look, but think about it: there is simply no reason why the blades for wind turbines can’t be built in pittsburgh instead of beijing. no reason. none. no reason. (applause.) so, folks, there’s no reason why american—american workers can’t lead the world in the production of electric vehicles and batteries. i mean, there is no reason. we have this capacity. (applause.) we have the brightest, best-trained people in the world. the american jobs plan is going to create millions of good-paying jobs—jobs americans can raise a family on—as my dad would then say, “with a little breathing room.” and all the investments in the american jobs plan will be guided by one principle: buy american. (applause.) buy american. and i might note, parenthetically—(applause)—that does not—that does not violate any trade agreement. it’s been the law since the ’30s: buy american. american tax dollars are going to be used to buy american products made in america to create american jobs. that’s the way it’s supposed to be and it will be in this administration. (applause.) and i made it clear to all my cabinet people. their ability to give exemptions has been exstrenuously [sic] limited. it will be american products. now i know some of you at home are wondering whether these jobs are for you. so many of you—so many of the folks i grew up with feel left behind, forgotten in an economy that’s so rapidly changing. it’s frightening. i want to speak directly to you. because if you think about it, that’s what people are most worried about: “can i fit in?” independent experts estimate the american jobs plan will add millions of jobs and trillions of dollars to economic growth in the years to come. it is a—it is an eight-year program. these are good-paying jobs that can’t be outsourced. nearly 90 percent of the infrastructure jobs created in the american jobs plan do not require a college degree; 75 percent don’t require an associate’s degree. the american jobs plan is a blue-collar blueprint to build america. that’s what it is. (applause.) and it recognizes something i’ve always said in this chamber and the other. good guys and women on wall street, but wall street didn’t build this country. the middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class. (applause.) so that’s why i’m calling on congress to pass the protect the right to organize act—the pro act—and send it to my desk so we can support the right to unionize. (applause.) and, by the way, while you’re thinking about sending things to my desk—(laughs)—let’s raise the minimum wage to $15. (applause.) no one—no one working 40 hours a week—no one working 40 hours a week should live below the poverty line. we need to ensure greater equity and opportunity for women. and while we’re doing this, let’s get the paycheck fairness act to my desk as well—equal pay. it’s been much too long. and if you’re wondering whether it’s too long, look behind me. (applause.) and finally, the american jobs plan will be the biggest increase in nondefense research and development on record. we will see more technological change—and some of you know more about this than i do—we’ll see more technological change in the next 10 years than we saw in the last 50. that’s how rapidly artificial intelligence and so much more is changing. and we’re falling behind the competition with the rest of the world. decades ago, we used to invest 2 percent of our gross domestic product in america—2 percent of our gross domestic product—in research and development. today, mr. secretary, that’s less than 1 percent. china and other countries are closing in fast. we have to develop and dominate the products and technologies of the future: advanced batteries, biotechnology, computer chips, clean energy. the secretary of defense can tell you—and those of you on—who work on national security issues know—the defense department has an agency called darpa—the defense advanced research project agency. the people who set up before i came here—and that’s been a long time ago—to develop breakthroughs that enhance our national security -– that’s their only job. and it’s a semi-separate agency; it’s under the defense department. it’s led to everything from the discovery of the internet to gps and so much more that has enhanced our security. the national institute of health—the nih –- i believe, should create a similar advanced research projects agency for health. (applause.) and that would—here’s what it would do. it would have a singular purpose: to develop breakthroughs to prevent, detect, and treat diseases like alzheimer’s, diabetes, and cancer. i’ll still never forget when we passed the cancer proposal the last year i was vice president—almost $9 million going to nih. and if you excuse the point of personal privilege, i’ll never forget you standing and mentioning—saying you’d name it after my deceased son. it meant a lot. but so many of us have deceased sons, daughters, and relatives who died of cancer. i can think of no more worthy investment. i know of nothing that is more bipartisan. so, let’s end cancer as we know it. (applause.) it’s within our power. (applause.) it’s within our power to do it. (applause.) investments in jobs and infrastructure, like the ones we’re talking about, have often had bipartisan support in the past. vice president harris and i met regularly in the oval office with democrats and republicans to discuss the jobs plan. and i applaud a group of republican senators who just put forward their own proposal. so, let’s get to work. i wanted to lay out, before the congress, my plan before we got into the deep discussions. i’d like to meet with those who have ideas that are different—they think are better. i welcome those ideas. but the rest of the world is not waiting for us. i just want to be clear: from my perspective, doing nothing is not an option. (applause.) look, we can’t be so busy competing with one another that we forget the competition that we have with the rest of the world to win the 21st century. secretary blinken can tell you, i spent a lot of time with president xi—traveled over 17,000 miles with him; spent, they tell me, over 24 hours in private discussions with him. when he called to congratulate me, we had a two-hour discussion. he’s deadly earnest about becoming the most significant, consequential nation in the world. he and others—autocrats—think that democracy can’t compete in the 21st century with autocracies because it takes too long to get consensus. to win that competition for the future, in my view, we also need to make a once-in-a-generation investment in our families and our children. that’s why i’ve introduced the american families plan tonight, which addresses four of the biggest challenges facing american families and, in turn, america. first is access to a good education. when this nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best-educated, best-prepared nation in the world. it’s, i believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century. but the world has caught up, or catching up. they are not waiting. i would say, parenthetically: if we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, “okay, we’re going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education,” i wonder whether we’d think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. i doubt it. twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. that’s why my american families plan guarantees four additional years of public education for every person in america, starting as early as we can. the great universities of this country have conducted studies over the last 10 years. it shows that adding two years of universal high-quality preschool for every three-year-old and four-year-old, no matter what background they come from, it puts them in the position to be able to compete all the way through 12 years. it increases exponentially their prospect of graduating and going on beyond graduation. the research shows when a young child goes to school—not daycare—they are far more likely to graduate from high school and go to college or something after high school. when you add two years of free community college on top of that, you begin to change the dynamic. (applause.) we can do that. (applause.) and we’ll increase pell grants and invest in historical black colleges and universities, tribal colleges, minority-serving institutions. the reason is: they don’t have the endowments, but their students are just as capable of learning about cybersecurity, just as capable of learning about metallurgy—all the things that are going on that provide those jobs of the future. jill was a community college professor who teaches today as first lady. she has long said—(applause). she has long—(applause). if i’ve heard it once, i’ve heard it a thousand times: “joe, any country that out-educates us is going to outcompete us.” she’ll be deeply involved in leading this effort. thank you, jill. second thing we need: american families plan will provide access to quality, affordable childcare. we guarantee—(applause). and i’m proposing a legislation to guarantee that low- and middle-income families will pay no more than 7 percent of their income for high-quality care for children up to the age of 5. the most hard-pressed working families won’t have to spend a dime. third, the american families plan will finally provide up to 12 weeks of paid leave and medical leave—family and medical leave. we’re one of the few industrial countries in the world—(applause). no one should have to choose between a job and paycheck or taking care of themselves and their loved ones –- a parent, a spouse, or child. and fourth, the american family plan puts directly into the pockets of millions of americans. in march, we expanded a tax credit for every child in a family. up to a $3,000 per child if they’re under [over] six years of age—i mean, excuse me—under—over six years of age, and $3,600 for children over [under] six years of age. with two parents, two kids, that’s $7,200 in the pockets that’s going to help to take care of your family. and that will help more than 65 million children and help cut childcare [child] poverty in half. (applause.) and we can afford it. so we did that in the rec-—in the—in the last piece of legislation we passed. but let’s extend that child care tax credit at least through the end of 2025. (applause.) the american rescue plan lowered healthcare premiums for 9 million americans who buy their coverage under the affordable care act. i know that’s really popular on this side of the aisle. (laughter.) but let’s make that provision permanent so their premiums don’t go back up. (applause.) in addition to my families plan, i’m going to work with congress to address, this year, other critical priorities for american families. the affordable care act has been a lifeline for millions of americans, protecting people with preexisting conditions, protecting women’s health. and the pandemic has demonstrated how badly—how badly it’s needed. let’s lower deductibles for working families on the affordable care—in the affordable care act. (applause.) and let’s lower prescription drug costs. (applause.) we know how to do this. the last president had that as an objective. we all know how outrageously expensive drugs are in america. in fact, we pay the highest prescription drug prices of anywhere in the world right here in america—nearly three times—for the same drug, nearly three times what other countries pay. we have to change that, and we can. let’s do what we’ve always talked about for all the years i was down here in this—in this body—in congress. let’s give medicare the power to save hundreds of billions of dollars by negotiating lower drug prescription prices. (applause.) and, by the way, that won’t just—that won’t just help people on medicare; it will lower prescription drug costs for everyone. and the money we save, which is billions of dollars, can go to strengthen the affordable care act and expand medicare coverage benefits without costing taxpayers an additional penny. it’s within our power to do it; let’s do it now. (applause.) we’ve talked about it long enough. democrats and republicans, let’s get it done this year. this is all about a simple premise: healthcare should be a right, not a privilege in america. (applause.) so, how do we pay for my jobs and family plan? i made it clear, we can do it without increasing the deficits. let’s start with what i will not do: i will not impose any tax increase on people making less than $400,000. it’s—but it’s time for corporate america and the wealthiest 1 percent of americans to just begin to pay their fair share. (applause.) just their fair share. sometimes i have arguments with my friends in the democratic party. i think you should be able to become a billionaire and a millionaire, but pay your fair share. a recent study shows that 55 of the nation’s biggest corporations paid zero federal tax last year. those 55 corporations made in excess of $40 billion in profit. a lot of companies also evade taxes through tax havens in switzerland and bermuda and the cayman islands. and they benefit from tax loopholes and deductions for offshoring jobs and shifting profits overseas. it’s not right. we’re going to reform corporate taxes so they pay their fair share and help pay for the public investments their businesses will benefit from as well. (applause.) we’re going to reward work, not just wealth. we take the top tax bracket for the wealthiest 1 percent of americans—those making over $400,000 or more—back up to where it was when george w. bush was president when he started: 39.6 percent. that’s where it was when george w. was president. we’re going to get rid of the loopholes that allow americans who make more than a million dollars a year and pay a lower tax rate on their capital gains than americans who receive a paycheck. we’re only going to affect three tenths of 1 percent of all americans by that action. three tenths of 1 percent. and the irs is going to crack down on millionaires and billionaires who cheat on their taxes. it’s estimated to be billions of dollars by think tanks that are left, right, and center. i’m not looking to punish anybody. but i will not add a tax burden—an additional tax burden to the middle class in this country. they’re already paying enough. i believe what i propose is fair—(applause)—fiscally responsible, and it raises revenue to pay for the plans i have proposed, and will create millions of jobs that will grow the economy and enhance our financial standing in the country. when you hear someone say that they don’t want to raise taxes on the wealthiest 1 percent or corporate america, ask them: “whose taxes you want to raise instead? whose are you going to cut?” look, the big tax cut of 2017—remember, it was supposed to pay for itself—that was how it was sold—and generate vast economic growth. instead, it added $2 trillion to the deficit. it was a huge windfall for corporate america and those at the very top. instead of using the tax saving to raise wages and invest in research and development, it poured billions of dollars into the pockets of ceos. in fact, the pay gap between ceos and their workers is now among the largest in history. according to one study, ceos make 320 times what the average worker in their corporation makes. it used to be in the—below a hundred. the pandemic has only made things worse. twenty million americans lost their job in the pandemic—working- and middle-class americans. at the same time, roughly 650 billionaires in america saw their net worth increase by more than $1 trillion—in the same exact period. let me say it again: 650 people increased their wealth by more than $1 trillion during this pandemic. and they’re now worth more than $4 trillion. my fellow americans, trickle-down—trickle-down economics has never worked and it’s time to grow the economy from the bottom and the middle out. (applause.) you know, there’s a broad consensus of economists—left, right, center—and they agree what i’m proposing will help create millions of jobs and generate historic economic growth. these are among the highest-value investments we can make as a nation. i’ve often said: our greatest strength is the power of our example, not just the example of our power. in my conversations with world leaders—and i’ve spoken to over 38, 40 of them now—i’ve made it known—i’ve made it known that america is back. and you know what they say? the comment that i hear most of all from them is they say, “we see america is back but for how long? but for how long?” my fellow americans, we have to show not just that we’re back, but that we’re back to stay and that we aren’t going to go it alone. (applause.) we’re going to do it by leading with our allies. (applause.) no one nation can deal with all the crises of our time—from terrorism, to nuclear proliferation, mass migration, cybersecurity, climate change, as well as experi-—what we’re experiencing now with pandemics. there’s no wall high enough to keep any virus out. and our own vaccine supply—as it grows to meet our needs; and we’re meeting them—will become an arsenal of vaccines for other countries, just as america was the arsenal of democracy for the world—(applause)—and in consequence, influenced the world. (applause.) but every american will have access before that occur-—every american will have access to be fully covered by covid-19—from the vaccines we have. look, the climate crisis is not our fight alone; it’s a global fight. the united states accounts, as all of you know, less than 15 percent of carbon emissions. the rest of the world accounts for 85 percent. that’s why i kept my commitment to rejoin the paris accord—because if we do everything perfectly, it’s not going to ultimately matter. i kept my commitment to convene a climate summit right here in america with all of the major economies of the world—china, russia, india, the european union—and i said i’d do it in my first 100 days. i want to be very blunt about it: i had—my attempt was to make sure that the world could see there was a consensus, that we are at an inflection point in history. and consensus—the consensus is: if we act to save the planet, we can create millions of jobs and economic growth and opportunity to raise the standard of living to almost everyone around the world. if you’ve watched any of it—and you were all busy; i’m sure you didn’t have much time—that’s what virtually every nation said, even the ones that aren’t doing their fair share. the investments i’ve proposed tonight also advance the foreign policy, in my view, that benefits the middle class. that means making sure every nation plays by the same rules in the global economy, including china. in my discussions—in my discussions with president xi, i told him, “we welcome the competition. we’re not looking for conflict.” but i made absolutely clear that we will defend america’s interests across the board. america will stand up to unfair trade practices that undercut american workers and american industries, like subsidies from state—to state-owned operations and enterprises and the theft of american technology and intellectual property. i also told president xi that we’ll maintain a strong military presence in the indo-pacific, just as we do with nato in europe—not to start a conflict, but to prevent one. (applause.) i told him what i’ve said to many world leaders: that america will not back away from our commitments—our commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms and to our alliances. and i pointed out to him: no responsible american president could remain silent when basic human rights are being so blatantly violated. an american president—president has to represent the essence of what our country stands for. america is an idea—the most unique idea in history: we are created, all of us, equal. it’s who we are, and we cannot walk away from that principle and, in fact, say we’re dealing with the american idea. with regard to russia, i know it concerns some of you, but i made very clear to putin that we’re not going to seek esca-—ecala-—exc-—excuse me—escalation, but their actions will have consequence if they turn out to be true. and they turned out to be true, so i responded directly and proportionally to russia’s interference in our elections and the cyberattacks on our government and our business. they did both of these things, and i told them we would respond, and we have. but we can also cooperate when it’s in our mutual interest. we did it when we extended the new start treaty on nuclear arms, and we’re working to do it on climate change. but he understands we will respond. on iran and north korea—nuclear programs that present serious threats to american security and the security of the world—we’re going to be working closely with our allies to address the threats posed by both of these countries through di-—through diplomacy, as well as stern deterrence. and american leadership means ending the forever war in afghanistan. (applause.) we have—(applause)—we have, without hyperbole, the greatest fighting force in the history of the world. i’m the first president in 40 years who knows what it means to have a son serving in a warzone. today we have servicemembers serving in the same warzone as their parents did. we have servicemembers in afghanistan who were not yet born on 9/11. the war in afghanistan, as we remember the debates here, were never meant to be multi-generational undertakings of nation-building. we went to afghanistan to get terrorists—the terrorists who attacked us on 9/11—and we said we would follow osama bin laden to the gates of hell to do it. if you’ve been to the upper kunar valley, you’ve kind of seen the gates of hell. and we delivered justice to bin laden. we degraded the terrorist threat of al qaeda in afghanistan. and after 20 years of value—valor and sacrifice, it’s time to bring those troops home. (applause.) look, even as we do, we will maintain an over-the-horizon capacity to suppress future threats to the homeland. and make no mistake: in 20 years, terrorists has—terrorism has metastasized. the threat has evolved way beyond afghanistan. and those of you in the intelligence committees, the foreign relations committee, the defense committees, you know well: we have to remain vigilant against the threats to the united states wherever they come from. al qaeda and isis are in yemen, syria, somalia, other places in africa, the middle east, and beyond. and we won’t ignore what our intelligence agencies have determined to be the most lethal terrorist threat to the homeland today: white supremacy is terrorism. we’re not going to ignore that either. my fellow americans, look, we have to come together to heal the soul of this nation. it was nearly a year ago, before her father’s funeral, when i spoke with gianna floyd, george floyd’s young daughter. she’s a little tyke, so i was kneeling down to talk to her so i could look her in the eye. and she looked at me and she said, “my daddy changed the world.” well, after the conviction of george floyd’s murderer, we can see how right she was if—if we have the courage to act as a congress. we’ve all seen the knee of injustice on the neck of black americans. now is our opportunity to make some real progress. the vast majority of men and women wearing the uniform and a badge serve our communities, and they serve them honorably. i know them. i know they want—(applause)—i know they want to help meet this moment as well. my fellow americans, we have to come together to rebuild trust between law enforcement and the people they serve, to root out systemic racism in our criminal justice system, and to enact police reform in george floyd’s name that passed the house already. i know republicans have their own ideas and are engaged in the very productive discussions with democrats in the senate. we need to work together to find a consensus. but let’s get it done next month, by the first anniversary of george floyd’s death. (applause.) the country supports this reform, and congress should act—should act. we have a giant opportunity to bend to the arc of the moral universe towards justice—real justice. and with the plans outlined tonight, we have a real chance to root out systemic racism that plagues america and american lives in other ways; a chance to deliver real equity—good jobs, good schools, affordable housing, clean air, clean water, being able to generate wealth and pass it down two generations because you have an access to purchase a house. real opportunities in the lives of more americans—black, white, latino, asian americans, native americans. look, i also want to thank the united states senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the covid-19 hate crimes act to protect asian americans and pacific islanders. (applause.) you acted decisively. (applause.) and you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we’ve seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. i urge the house to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which i will gladly, anxiously sign. i also hope congress can get to my desk the equality act to protect lgbtq americans. (applause.) to all transgender americans watching at home, especially young people who are so brave, i want you to know your president has your back. another thing: let’s authorize the violence against women act, which has been law for 27 years. (applause.) twenty-seven years ago, i wrote it. it’ll close the—the act that has to be authorized now will close the “boyfriend” loophole to keep guns out of the hands of abusers. the court order said, “this is an abuser. you can’t own a gun.” it’s to close that loophole that existed. you know, it’s estimated that 50 women are shot and killed by an intimate partner every month in america—50 a month. let’s pass it and save some lives. (applause.) and i need not—i need not tell anyone this, but gun violence is becoming an epidemic in america. the flag at the white house was still flying at half-mast for the 8 victims in the mass shooting in georgia when 10 more lives were taken in a mass shooting in colorado. and in the week in between those two events, 250 other americans were shot dead in the streets of america—250 shot dead. i know how hard it is to make progress on this issue. in the ’90s, we passed universal background checks, a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines that hold 100 rounds that can be fired off in seconds. we beat the nra. mass shootings and gun violence declined. check out the report in over 10 years. but in the early twe-—2000s, the law expired, and we’ve seen daily bloodshed since. i’m not saying if the law continued, we wouldn’t see bloodshed. more than two weeks ago in the rose garden, surrounded by some of the bravest people i know—the survivors and families who lost loved ones to gun violence—i laid out several of the department of justice a-—actions that are being taken to—impact on this epidemic. one of them is banning so-called “ghost guns.” these are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. the parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes and they can’t be traced. the buyers of these ghost gun kits aren’t required to pass any background check. anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and within 30 minutes have a weapon that’s lethal. but no more. and i will do everything in my power to protect the american people from this epidemic of gun violence, but it’s time for congress to act as well. (applause.) look, i don’t want to become confrontational but we need more senate republicans to join the overwhelming majority of democrat colleagues and close the loopholes requiring a background check on purchases of guns. we need a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. and don’t tell me it can’t be done. we did it before, and it worked. talk to most responsible gun owners and hunters. they’ll tell you there’s no possible justification for having 100 rounds in a weapon. what do you think—deer are wearing kevlar vests? (laughter.) they’ll tell you that there are too many people today who are able to buy a gun but shouldn’t be able to buy a gun. these kinds of reasonable reforms have overwhelming support from the american people, including many gun owners. the country supports reform and is—and congress should act. this shouldn’t be a red or blue issue. and no amendment to the constitution is absolute. you can’t yell “fire!” in a crowded theater. from the very beginning, there were certain guns, weapons, that could not be owned by americans. certain people could not own those weapons ever. we’re not changing the constitution; we’re being reasonable. i think this is not a democrat or republican issue; i think it’s an american issue. and here’s what else we can do: immigration has always been essential to america. let’s end our exhausting war over immigration. for more than 30 years, politicians have talked about immigration reform, and we’ve done nothing about it. it’s time to fix it. on day one of my presidency, i kept my commitment and sent a comprehensive immigration bill to the united states congress. if you believe we need to secure the border, pass it, because it has a lot of money for high-tech border security. if you believe in a pathway to citizenship, pass it so over 11 million undocumented folks—the vast majority are here overstaying visas. pass it. we can actually—if you actually want to solve a problem, i’ve sent a bill to take a close look at it. we have to—also have to get at the root problem of why people are fleeing, particularly to—to our southern border from guatemala, honduras, and el salvador: the violence, the corruption, the gangs, and the political instability, hunger, hurricanes, earthquakes, natural disasters. when i was president, my president—when i was vice president, the president asked me to focus on providing the help needed to address the root causes of migration. and it helped keep people in their own countries instead of being forced to leave. the plan was working, but the last administration decided it was not worth it. i’m restoring the program and asked vice president harris to lead our diplomatic effort to take care of this. i have absolute confidence she’ll get the job done. (applause.) now, look, if you don’t like my plan, let’s at least pass what we all agree on. congress needs to pass legislation this year to finally secure protection for dreamers—the young people who have only known america as their home. (applause.) and permanent protection for immigrants who are here on temporary protected status who came from countries beset by manmade and natural-made violence and disaster. (applause.) as well as a pathway to citizenship for farmworkers who put food on our tables. (applause.) look, immigrants have done so much for america during this pandemic and throughout our history. the country supports immigration reform. we should act. let’s argue over it, let’s debate it, but let’s act. (applause.) and if we truly want to restore the soul of america, we need to protect the sacred right to vote. most people—(applause). more people voted in the last presidential election than any time in american history, in the middle of the worst pandemic ever. it should be celebrated. instead, it’s being attacked. congress should pass h.r. 1 and the john lewis voting rights act and send it to my desk right away. (applause.) the country supports it. the congress should act now. (applause.) look, in closing, as we gather here tonight, the images of a violent mob assaulting this capitol, desecrating our democracy, remain vivid in all our minds. lives were put at risk—many of your lives. lives were lost. extraordinary courage was summoned. the insurrection was an existential crisis –- a test of whether our democracy could survive. and it did. but the struggle is far from over. the question of whether our democracy will long endure is both ancient and urgent, as old as our republic—still vital today. can our democracy deliver on its promise that all of us, created equal in the image of god, have a chance to lead lives of dignity, respect, and possibility? can our democracy deliver the most—to the most pressing needs of our people? can our democracy overcome the lies, anger, hate, and fears that have pulled us apart? america’s adversaries –- the autocrats of the world –- are betting we can’t. and i promise you, they’re betting we can’t. they believe we’re too full of anger and division and rage. they look at the images of the mob that assaulted the capitol as proof that the sun is setting on american democracy. but they are wrong. you know it; i know it. but we have to prove them wrong. we have to prove democracy still works—that our government still works and we can deliver for our people. in our first 100 days together, we have acted to restore the people’s faith in democracy to deliver. we’re vaccinating the nation. we’re creating hundreds of thousands of new jobs. we’re delivering real results to people; they can see it and feel it in their own lives. opening doors of opportunity, guaranteeing some more fairness and justice—that’s the essence of america. that’s democracy in action. our constitution opens with the words—as trite as it sounds—“we the people”. well, it’s time to remember that “we the people” are the government—you and i. not some force in a distant capital. not some powerful force that we have no control over. it’s us. it’s “we the people.” in another era when our democracy was tested, franklin roosevelt reminded us, “in america, we do our part.” we all do our part. that’s all i’m asking: that we do our part, all of us. if we do that, we will meet the center challenge of the age by proving that democracy is durable and strong. autocrats will not win the future. we will. america will. and the future belongs to america. as i stand here tonight before you, in a new and vital hour of life and democracy of our nation, and i can say with absolute confidence: i have never been more confident or optimistic about america—not because i’m president, because what’s happening with the american people. we have stared into the abyss of insurrection and autocracy, pandemic and pain, and “we the people” did not flinch. at the very moment our adversaries were certain we would pull apart and fail, we came together. we united. with light and hope, we summoned a new strength, new resolve to position us to win the competition of the 21st century, on our way to a union more perfect, more prosperous, and more just, as one people, one nation, and one america. folks, as i told every world leader i’ve ever met with over the years, it’s never ever, ever been a good bet to bet against america, and it still isn’t. (applause.) we are the united states of america. (applause.) there is not a single thing—nothing—nothing beyond our capacity. we can do whatever we set our mind to do if we do it together. (applause.) so let’s begin to get together. (applause.) god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. thank you for your patience. (applause.) Transcript
Mr. Speaker. Madam Vice President. Our First Lady and Second Gentleman.
Members of Congress and the Cabinet. Leaders of our military.
Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, and retired Justices of the Supreme Court.
And you, my fellow Americans.
I start tonight by congratulating the members of the 118th Congress and the new Speaker of the House, Kevin McCarthy.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working together.
I also want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats and the first Black House Minority Leader in history, Hakeem Jeffries.
Congratulations to the longest serving Senate Leader in history, Mitch McConnell.
And congratulations to Chuck Schumer for another term as Senate Majority Leader, this time with an even bigger majority.
And I want to give special recognition to someone who I think will be considered the greatest Speaker in the history of this country, Nancy Pelosi.
The story of America is a story of progress and resilience. Of always moving forward. Of never giving up.
A story that is unique among all nations.
We are the only country that has emerged from every crisis stronger than when we entered it.
That is what we are doing again.
Two years ago, our economy was reeling.
As I stand here tonight, we have created a record 12 million new jobs, more jobs created in two years than any president has ever created in four years.
Two years ago, COVID had shut down our businesses, closed our schools, and robbed us of so much.
Today, COVID no longer controls our lives.
And two years ago, our democracy faced its greatest threat since the Civil War.
Today, though bruised, our democracy remains unbowed and unbroken.
As we gather here tonight, we are writing the next chapter in the great American story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders ask me to define America, I define our country in one word: Possibilities.
You know, we’re often told that Democrats and Republicans can’t work together.
But over these past two years, we proved the cynics and the naysayers wrong.
Yes, we disagreed plenty. And yes, there were times when Democrats had to go it alone.
But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together.
Came together to defend a stronger and safer Europe.
Came together to pass a once-in-a-generation infrastructure law, building bridges to connect our nation and people.
Came together to pass one of the most significant laws ever, helping veterans exposed to toxic burn pits.
In fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan laws since becoming President. From reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act, to the Electoral Count Reform Act, to the Respect for Marriage Act that protects the right to marry the person you love.
To my Republican friends, if we could work together in the last Congress, there is no reason we can’t work together in this new Congress.
The people sent us a clear message. Fighting for the sake of fighting, power for the sake of power, conflict for the sake of conflict, gets us nowhere.
And that’s always been my vision for our country. To restore the soul of the nation. To rebuild the backbone of America, the middle class. To unite the country.
We’ve been sent here to finish the job.
For decades, the middle class was hollowed out.
Too many good-paying manufacturing jobs moved overseas. Factories at home closed down.
Once-thriving cities and towns became shadows of what they used to be.
And along the way, something else was lost.
Pride. That sense of self-worth.
I ran for President to fundamentally change things, to make sure the economy works for everyone so we can all feel pride in what we do.
To build an economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. Because when the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well.
As my Dad used to say, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, “Honey—it’s going to be OK,” and mean it.
So, let’s look at the results. Unemployment rate at 3.4%, a 50-year low. Near record low unemployment for Black and Hispanic workers.
We’ve already created 800,000 good-paying manufacturing jobs, the fastest growth in 40 years.
Where is it written that America can’t lead the world in manufacturing again?
For too many decades, we imported products and exported jobs.
Now, thanks to all we’ve done, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs.
Inflation has been a global problem because of the pandemic that disrupted supply chains and Putin’s war that disrupted energy and food supplies.
But we’re better positioned than any country on Earth.
We have more to do, but here at home, inflation is coming down.
Here at home, gas prices are down $1.50 a gallon since their peak.
Food inflation is coming down.
Inflation has fallen every month for the last six months while take home pay has gone up.
Additionally, over the last two years, a record 10 million Americans applied to start a new small business.
Every time somebody starts a small business, it’s an act of hope.
And the Vice President will continue her work to ensure more small businesses can access capital and the historic laws we enacted.
Standing here last year, I shared with you a story of American genius and possibility.
Semiconductors, the small computer chips the size of your fingertip that power everything from cellphones to automobiles, and so much more. These chips were invented right here in America.
America used to make nearly 40% of the world’s chips.
But in the last few decades, we lost our edge and we’re down to producing only 10%. We all saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories overseas shut down.
Today’s automobiles need up to 3,000 chips each, but American automakers couldn’t make enough cars because there weren’t enough chips.
Car prices went up. So did everything from refrigerators to cellphones.
We can never let that happen again.
That’s why we came together to pass the bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act.
We’re making sure the supply chain for America begins in America.
We’ve already created 800,000 manufacturing jobs even without this law.
With this new law, we will create hundreds of thousands of new jobs across the country.
That’s going to come from companies that have announced more than $300 billion in investments in American manufacturing in the last two years.
Outside of Columbus, Ohio, Intel is building semiconductor factories on a thousand acres – a literal field of dreams.
That’ll create 10,000 jobs. 7,000 construction jobs. 3,000 jobs once the factories are finished.
Jobs paying $130,000 a year, and many don’t require a college degree.
Jobs where people don’t have to leave home in search of opportunity.
And it’s just getting started.
Think about the new homes, new small businesses, and so much more that will come to life.
Talk to mayors and Governors, Democrats and Republicans, and they’ll tell you what this means to their communities.
We’re seeing these fields of dreams transform the heartland.
But to maintain the strongest economy in the world, we also need the best infrastructure in the world.
We used to be #1 in the world in infrastructure, then we fell to #13th.
Now we’re coming back because we came together to pass the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the largest investment in infrastructure since President Eisenhower’s Interstate Highway System.
Already, we’ve funded over 20,000 projects, including at major airports from Boston to Atlanta to Portland.
These projects will put hundreds of thousands of people to work rebuilding our highways, bridges, railroads, tunnels, ports and airports, clean water, and high-speed internet across America.
Urban. Suburban. Rural. Tribal.
And we’re just getting started. I sincerely thank my Republican friends who voted for the law.
And to my Republican friends who voted against it but still ask to fund projects in their districts, don’t worry.
I promised to be the president for all Americans.
We’ll fund your projects. And I’ll see you at the ground-breaking.
This law will help further unite all of America.
Major projects like the Brent Spence bridge between Kentucky and Ohio over the Ohio River. Built 60 years ago. Badly in need of repairs.
One of the nation’s most congested freight routes carrying $2 billion worth of freight every day. Folks have been talking about fixing it for decades, but we’re finally going to get it done.
I went there last month with Democrats and Republicans from both states to deliver $1.6 billion for this project.
While I was there, I met an ironworker named Sara, who is here tonight.
For 30 years, she’s been a proud member of Ironworkers Local 44, known as the “cowboys of the sky” who built the Cincinnati skyline.
Sara said she can’t wait to be ten stories above the Ohio River building that new bridge. That’s pride.
That’s what we’re also building—Pride.
We’re also replacing poisonous lead pipes that go into 10 million homes and 400,000 schools and childcare centers, so every child in America can drink clean water.
We’re making sure that every community has access to affordable, high-speed internet.
No parent should have to drive to a McDonald’s parking lot so their kid can do their homework online.
And when we do these projects, we’re going to Buy American.
Buy American has been the law of the land since 1933. But for too long, past administrations have found ways to get around it.
Not anymore.
Tonight, I’m also announcing new standards to require all construction materials used in federal infrastructure projects to be made in America.
American-made lumber, glass, drywall, fiber optic cables.
And on my watch, American roads, American bridges, and American highways will be made with American products.
My economic plan is about investing in places and people that have been forgotten. Amid the economic upheaval of the past four decades, too many people have been left behind or treated like they’re invisible.
Maybe that’s you, watching at home.
You remember the jobs that went away. And you wonder whether a path even exists anymore for you and your children to get ahead without moving away.
I get it.
That’s why we’re building an economy where no one is left behind.
Jobs are coming back, pride is coming back, because of the choices we made in the last two years. This is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America and make a real difference in your lives.
For example, too many of you lay in bed at night staring at the ceiling, wondering what will happen if your spouse gets cancer, your child gets sick, or if something happens to you.
Will you have the money to pay your medical bills? Will you have to sell the house?
I get it. With the Inflation Reduction Act that I signed into law, we’re taking on powerful interests to bring your health care costs down so you can sleep better at night.
You know, we pay more for prescription drugs than any major country on Earth.
For example, one in ten Americans has diabetes.
Every day, millions need insulin to control their diabetes so they can stay alive. Insulin has been around for 100 years. It costs drug companies just $10 a vial to make.
But, Big Pharma has been unfairly charging people hundreds of dollars—and making record profits.
Not anymore.
We capped the cost of insulin at $35 a month for seniors on Medicare.
But there are millions of other Americans who are not on Medicare, including 200,000 young people with Type I diabetes who need insulin to save their lives.
Let’s finish the job this time.
Let’s cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month for every American who needs it.
This law also caps out-of-pocket drug costs for seniors on Medicare at a maximum $2,000 per year when there are in fact many drugs, like expensive cancer drugs, that can cost up to $10,000, $12,000, and $14,000 a year.
If drug prices rise faster than inflation, drug companies will have to pay Medicare back the difference.
And we’re finally giving Medicare the power to negotiate drug prices. Bringing down prescription drug costs doesn’t just save seniors money.
It will cut the federal deficit, saving tax payers hundreds of billions of dollars on the prescription drugs the government buys for Medicare.
Why wouldn’t we want to do that?
Now, some members here are threatening to repeal the Inflation Reduction Act.
Make no mistake, if you try to do anything to raise the cost of prescription drugs, I will veto it.
I’m pleased to say that more Americans have health insurance now than ever in history.
A record 16 million people are enrolled under the Affordable Care Act.
Thanks to the law I signed last year, millions are saving $800 a year on their premiums.
But the way that law was written, that benefit expires after 2025.
Let’s finish the job, make those savings permanent, and expand coverage to those left off Medicaid.
Look, the Inflation Reduction Act is also the most significant investment ever to tackle the climate crisis.
Lowering utility bills, creating American jobs, and leading the world to a clean energy future.
I’ve visited the devastating aftermaths of record floods and droughts, storms, and wildfires.
In addition to emergency recovery from Puerto Rico to Florida to Idaho, we are rebuilding for the long term.
New electric grids able to weather the next major storm.
Roads and water systems to withstand the next big flood.
Clean energy to cut pollution and create jobs in communities too often left behind.
We’re building 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations installed across the country by tens of thousands of IBEW workers.
And helping families save more than $1,000 a year with tax credits for the purchase of electric vehicles and energy-efficient appliances.
Historic conservation efforts to be responsible stewards of our lands.
Let’s face reality.
The climate crisis doesn’t care if your state is red or blue. It is an existential threat.
We have an obligation to our children and grandchildren to confront it. I’m proud of how America is at last stepping up to the challenge.
But there’s so much more to do.
We will finish the job.
And we pay for these investments in our future by finally making the wealthiest and the biggest corporations begin to pay their fair share.
I’m a capitalist. But just pay your fair share.
And I think a lot of you at home agree with me that our present tax system is simply unfair.
The idea that in 2020, 55 of the biggest companies in America made $40 billion in profits and paid zero in federal income taxes?
That’s simply not fair.
But now, because of the law I signed, billion-dollar companies have to pay a minimum of 15%.
Just 15%.
That’s less than a nurse pays. Let me be clear.
Under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in taxes.
Nobody. Not one penny.
But there’s more to do.
Let’s finish the job. Reward work, not just wealth. Pass my proposal for a billionaire minimum tax.
Because no billionaire should pay a lower tax rate than a school teacher or a firefighter.
You may have noticed that Big Oil just reported record profits.
Last year, they made $200 billion in the midst of a global energy crisis.
It’s outrageous.
They invested too little of that profit to increase domestic production and keep gas prices down.
Instead, they used those record profits to buy back their own stock, rewarding their CEOs and shareholders.
Corporations ought to do the right thing.
That’s why I propose that we quadruple the tax on corporate stock buybacks to encourage long term investments instead.
They will still make a considerable profit.
Let’s finish the job and close the loopholes that allow the very wealthy to avoid paying their taxes.
Instead of cutting the number of audits of wealthy tax payers, I signed a law that will reduce the deficit by $114 billion by cracking down on wealthy tax cheats.
That’s being fiscally responsible.
In the last two years, my administration cut the deficit by more than $1.7 trillion—the largest deficit reduction in American history.
Under the previous administration, America’s deficit went up four years in a row.
Because of those record deficits, no president added more to the national debt in any four years than my predecessor.
Nearly 25% of the entire national debt, a debt that took 200 years to accumulate, was added by that administration alone.
How did Congress respond to all that debt?
They lifted the debt ceiling three times without preconditions or crisis.
They paid America’s bills to prevent economic disaster for our country.
Tonight, I’m asking this Congress to follow suit.
Let us commit here tonight that the full faith and credit of the United States of America will never, ever be questioned.
Some of my Republican friends want to take the economy hostage unless I agree to their economic plans. All of you at home should know what their plans are.
Instead of making the wealthy pay their fair share, some Republicans want Medicare and Social Security to sunset every five years.
That means if Congress doesn’t vote to keep them, those programs will go away.
Other Republicans say if we don’t cut Social Security and Medicare, they’ll let America default on its debt for the first time in our history.
I won’t let that happen.
Social Security and Medicare are a lifeline for millions of seniors.
Americans have been paying into them with every single paycheck since they started working.
So tonight, let’s all agree to stand up for seniors. Stand up and show them we will not cut Social Security. We will not cut Medicare.
Those benefits belong to the American people. They earned them.
If anyone tries to cut Social Security, I will stop them. And if anyone tries to cut Medicare, I will stop them.
I will not allow them to be taken away.
Not today. Not tomorrow. Not ever.
Next month when I offer my fiscal plan, I ask my Republican friends to offer their plan.
We can sit down together and discuss both plans together.
My plan will lower the deficit by $2 trillion.
I won’t cut a single Social Security or Medicare benefit.
In fact, I will extend the Medicare Trust Fund by at least two decades.
I will not raise taxes on anyone making under $400,000 a year. And I will pay for the ideas I’ve talked about tonight by making the wealthy and big corporations begin to pay their fair share.
Look, here’s the deal. Big corporations aren’t just taking advantage of the tax code. They’re taking advantage of you, the American consumer.
Here’s my message to all of you out there: I have your back. We’re already preventing insurance companies from sending surprise medical bills, stopping 1 million surprise bills a month.
We’re protecting seniors’ lives and life savings by cracking down on nursing homes that commit fraud, endanger patient safety, or prescribe drugs they don’t need.
Millions of Americans can now save thousands of dollars because they can finally get hearing aids over-the-counter without a prescription.
Capitalism without competition is not capitalism. It is exploitation.
Last year I cracked down on foreign shipping companies that were making you pay higher prices for everyday goods coming into our country.
I signed a bipartisan bill that cut shipping costs by 90%, helping American farmers, businesses, and consumers.
Let’s finish the job.
Pass bipartisan legislation to strengthen antitrust enforcement and prevent big online platforms from giving their own products an unfair advantage.
My administration is also taking on “junk” fees, those hidden surcharges too many businesses use to make you pay more.
For example, we’re making airlines show you the full ticket price upfront and refund your money if your flight is cancelled or delayed.
We’ve reduced exorbitant bank overdraft fees, saving consumers more than $1 billion a year.
We’re cutting credit card late fees by 75%, from $30 to $8.
Junk fees may not matter to the very wealthy, but they matter to most folks in homes like the one I grew up in. They add up to hundreds of dollars a month.
They make it harder for you to pay the bills or afford that family trip.
I know how unfair it feels when a company overcharges you and gets away with it.
Not anymore.
We’ve written a bill to stop all that. It’s called the Junk Fee Prevention Act.
We’ll ban surprise “resort fees” that hotels tack on to your bill. These fees can cost you up to $90 a night at hotels that aren’t even resorts.
We’ll make cable internet and cellphone companies stop charging you up to $200 or more when you decide to switch to another provider.
We’ll cap service fees on tickets to concerts and sporting events and make companies disclose all fees upfront.
And we’ll prohibit airlines from charging up to $50 roundtrip for families just to sit together.
Baggage fees are bad enough—they can’t just treat your child like a piece of luggage.
Americans are tired of being played for suckers.
Pass the Junk Fee Prevention Act so companies stop ripping us off.
For too long, workers have been getting stiffed.
Not anymore.
We’re beginning to restore the dignity of work.
For example, 30 million workers had to sign non-compete agreements when they took a job. So a cashier at a burger place can’t cross the street to take the same job at another burger place to make a couple bucks more.
Not anymore.
We’re banning those agreements so companies have to compete for workers and pay them what they’re worth.
I’m so sick and tired of companies breaking the law by preventing workers from organizing.
Pass the PRO Act because workers have a right to form a union. And let’s guarantee all workers a living wage.
Let’s also make sure working parents can afford to raise a family with sick days, paid family and medical leave, and affordable child care that will enable millions more people to go to work.
Let’s also restore the full Child Tax Credit, which gave tens of millions of parents some breathing room and cut child poverty in half, to the lowest level in history.
And by the way, when we do all of these things, we increase productivity. We increase economic growth.
Let’s also finish the job and get more families access to affordable and quality housing.
Let’s get seniors who want to stay in their homes the care they need to do so. And give a little more breathing room to millions of family caregivers looking after their loved ones.
Pass my plan so we get seniors and people with disabilities the home care services they need and support the workers who are doing God’s work.
These plans are fully paid for and we can afford to do them.
Restoring the dignity of work also means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class.
When we made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best-educated, best-prepared nation in the world.
But the world has caught up.
Jill, who teaches full-time, has an expression: “Any nation that out-educates us will out-compete us.”
Folks, you all know 12 years is not enough to win the economic competition for the 21st Century.
If you want America to have the best-educated workforce, let’s finish the job by providing access to pre-school for 3- and 4-year-olds.
Studies show that children who go to pre-school are nearly 50% more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2- or 4-year degree, no matter their background.
Let’s give public school teachers a raise.
And we’re making progress by reducing student debt and increasing Pell Grants for working- and middle-class families.
Let’s finish the job, connect students to career opportunities starting in high school and provide two years of community college, some of the best career training in America, in addition to being a pathway to a four-year degree.
Let’s offer every American the path to a good career whether they go to college or not.
And folks, in the midst of the COVID crisis when schools were closed, let’s also recognize how far we’ve come in the fight against the pandemic itself.
While the virus is not gone, thanks to the resilience of the American people, we have broken COVID’s grip on us.
COVID deaths are down nearly 90%.
We’ve saved millions of lives and opened our country back up.
And soon we’ll end the public health emergency.
But we will remember the toll and pain that will never go away for so many. More than 1 million Americans have lost their lives to COVID.
Families grieving. Children orphaned. Empty chairs at the dining room table.
We remember them, and we remain vigilant.
We still need to monitor dozens of variants and support new vaccines and treatments.
So Congress needs to fund these efforts and keep America safe.
And as we emerge from this crisis stronger, I’m also doubling down on prosecuting criminals who stole relief money meant to keep workers and small businesses afloat during the pandemic.
Before I came to office many inspector generals who protect taxpayer dollars were sidelined. Fraud was rampant.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then, we’ve recovered billions of taxpayer dollars.
Now, let’s triple our anti-fraud strike forces going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars from the American people.
For every dollar we put into fighting fraud, taxpayers get back at least ten times as much.
COVID left other scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic.
We have an obligation to make sure all our people are safe.
Public safety depends on public trust. But too often that trust is violated.
Joining us tonight are the parents of Tyre Nichols, who had to bury him just last week. There are no words to describe the heartbreak and grief of losing a child.
But imagine what it’s like to lose a child at the hands of the law.
Imagine having to worry whether your son or daughter will come home from walking down the street or playing in the park or just driving their car.
I’ve never had to have the talk with my children—Beau, Hunter, and Ashley—that so many Black and Brown families have had with their children.
If a police officer pulls you over, turn on your interior lights. Don’t reach for your license. Keep your hands on the steering wheel.
Imagine having to worry like that every day in America.
Here’s what Tyre’s mom shared with me when I asked her how she finds the courage to carry on and speak out.
With faith in God, she said her son “was a beautiful soul and something good will come from this.”
Imagine how much courage and character that takes.
It’s up to us. It’s up to all of us.
We all want the same thing.
Neighborhoods free of violence.
Law enforcement who earn the community’s trust.
Our children to come home safely.
Equal protection under the law; that’s the covenant we have with each other in America.
And we know police officers put their lives on the line every day, and we ask them to do too much.
To be counselors, social workers, psychologists; responding to drug overdoses, mental health crises, and more.
We ask too much of them.
I know most cops are good, decent people. They risk their lives every time they put on that shield.
But what happened to Tyre in Memphis happens too often.
We have to do better.
Give law enforcement the training they need, hold them to higher standards, and help them succeed in keeping everyone safe.
We also need more first responders and other professionals to address growing mental health and substance abuse challenges.
More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime; more community intervention programs; more investments in housing, education, and job training.
All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
And when police officers or departments violate the public’s trust, we must hold them accountable.
With the support of families of victims, civil rights groups, and law enforcement, I signed an executive order for all federal officers banning chokeholds, restricting no-knock warrants, and other key elements of the George Floyd Act.
Let’s commit ourselves to make the words of Tyre’s mother come true, something good must come from this.
All of us in this chamber, we need to rise to this moment.
We can’t turn away.
Let’s do what we know in our hearts we need to do.
Let’s come together and finish the job on police reform.
Do something.
That was the same plea of parents who lost their children in Uvalde: Do something on gun violence.
Thank God we did, passing the most sweeping gun safety law in three decades.
That includes things that the majority of responsible gun owners support, like enhanced background checks for 18 to 21-year-olds and red flag laws keeping guns out of the hands of people who are a danger to themselves and others.
But we know our work is not done.
Joining us tonight is Brandon Tsay, a 26-year-old hero.
Brandon put off his college dreams to stay by his mom’s side as she was dying from cancer. He now works at a dance studio started by his grandparents.
Two weeks ago, during Lunar New Year celebrations, he heard the studio’s front door close and saw a man pointing a gun at him.
He thought he was going to die, but then he thought about the people inside.
In that instant, he found the courage to act and wrestled the semi-automatic pistol away from a gunman who had already killed 11 people at another dance studio.
He saved lives. It’s time we do the same as well.
Ban assault weapons once and for all.
We did it before. I led the fight to ban them in 1994.
In the 10 years the ban was law, mass shootings went down. After Republicans let it expire, mass shootings tripled.
Let’s finish the job and ban assault weapons again.
And let’s also come together on immigration and make it a bipartisan issue like it was before.
We now have a record number of personnel working to secure the border, arresting 8,000 human smugglers and seizing over 23,000 pounds of fentanyl in just the last several months.
Since we launched our new border plan last month, unlawful migration from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela has come down 97%.
But America’s border problems won’t be fixed until Congress acts.
If you won’t pass my comprehensive immigration reform, at least pass my plan to provide the equipment and officers to secure the border. And a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers, those on temporary status, farm workers, and essential workers.
Here in the people’s House, it’s our duty to protect all the people’s rights and freedoms.
Congress must restore the right the Supreme Court took away last year and codify Roe v. Wade to protect every woman’s constitutional right to choose.
The Vice President and I are doing everything we can to protect access to reproductive health care and safeguard patient privacy. But already, more than a dozen states are enforcing extreme abortion bans.
Make no mistake; if Congress passes a national abortion ban, I will veto it.
Let’s also pass the bipartisan Equality Act to ensure LGBTQ Americans, especially transgender young people, can live with safety and dignity.
Our strength is not just the example of our power, but the power of our example. Let’s remember the world is watching.
I spoke from this chamber one year ago, just days after Vladimir Putin unleashed his brutal war against Ukraine.
A murderous assault, evoking images of the death and destruction Europe suffered in World War II.
Putin’s invasion has been a test for the ages. A test for America. A test for the world.
Would we stand for the most basic of principles?
Would we stand for sovereignty?
Would we stand for the right of people to live free from tyranny?
Would we stand for the defense of democracy?
For such a defense matters to us because it keeps the peace and prevents open season for would-be aggressors to threaten our security and prosperity. One year later, we know the answer.
Yes, we would.
And yes, we did.
Together, we did what America always does at our best.
We led.
We united NATO and built a global coalition.
We stood against Putin’s aggression.
We stood with the Ukrainian people.
Tonight, we are once again joined by Ukraine’s Ambassador to the United States. She represents not just her nation, but the courage of her people.
Ambassador, America is united in our support for your country. We will stand with you as long as it takes.
Our nation is working for more freedom, more dignity, and more peace, not just in Europe, but everywhere.
Before I came to office, the story was about how the People’s Republic of China was increasing its power and America was falling in the world.
Not anymore.
I’ve made clear with President Xi that we seek competition, not conflict.
I will make no apologies that we are investing to make America strong. Investing in American innovation, in industries that will define the future, and that China’s government is intent on dominating.
Investing in our alliances and working with our allies to protect our advanced technologies so they’re not used against us.
Modernizing our military to safeguard stability and deter aggression.
Today, we’re in the strongest position in decades to compete with China or anyone else in the world.
I am committed to work with China where it can advance American interests and benefit the world.
But make no mistake: as we made clear last week, if China’s threatens our sovereignty, we will act to protect our country. And we did.
And let’s be clear: winning the competition with China should unite all of us. We face serious challenges across the world.
But in the past two years, democracies have become stronger, not weaker.
Autocracies have grown weaker, not stronger.
America is rallying the world again to meet those challenges, from climate and global health, to food insecurity, to terrorism and territorial aggression.
Allies are stepping up, spending more and doing more.
And bridges are forming between partners in the Pacific and those in the Atlantic. And those who bet against America are learning just how wrong they are.
It’s never a good bet to bet against America.
When I came to office, most everyone assumed bipartisanship was impossible. But I never believed it.
That’s why a year ago, I offered a Unity Agenda for the nation.
We’ve made real progress.
Together, we passed a law making it easier for doctors to prescribe effective treatments for opioid addiction.
Passed a gun safety law making historic investments in mental health.
Launched ARPA-H to drive breakthroughs in the fight against cancer, Alzheimer’s, diabetes, and so much more.
We passed the Heath Robinson PACT Act, named for the late Iraq war veteran whose story about exposure to toxic burn pits I shared here last year.
But there is so much more to do. And we can do it together.
Joining us tonight is a father named Doug from Newton, New Hampshire.
He wrote Jill and me a letter about his daughter Courtney. Contagious laugh. Her sister’s best friend.
He shared a story all too familiar to millions of Americans.
Courtney discovered pills in high school. It spiraled into addiction and eventually her death from a fentanyl overdose.
She was 20 years old.
Describing the last eight years without her, Doug said, “There is no worse pain.”
Yet their family has turned pain into purpose, working to end stigma and change laws.
He told us he wants to “start the journey towards America’s recovery.”
Doug, we’re with you.
Fentanyl is killing more than 70,000 Americans a year.
Let’s launch a major surge to stop fentanyl production, sale, and trafficking, with more drug detection machines to inspect cargo and stop pills and powder at the border.
Working with couriers like Fed Ex to inspect more packages for drugs. Strong penalties to crack down on fentanyl trafficking.
Second, let’s do more on mental health, especially for our children. When millions of young people are struggling with bullying, violence, trauma, we owe them greater access to mental health care at school.
We must finally hold social media companies accountable for the experiment they are running on our children for profit.
And it’s time to pass bipartisan legislation to stop Big Tech from collecting personal data on kids and teenagers online, ban targeted advertising to children, and impose stricter limits on the personal data these companies collect on all of us.
Third, let’s do more to keep our nation’s one truly sacred obligation: to equip those we send into harm’s way and care for them and their families when they come home.
Job training and job placement for veterans and their spouses as they return to civilian life.
Helping veterans afford their rent because no one should be homeless in this country, especially not those who served it.
And we cannot go on losing 17 veterans a day to the silent scourge of suicide.
The VA is doing everything it can, including expanding mental health screenings and a proven program that recruits veterans to help other veterans understand what they’re going through and get the help they need.
And fourth, last year Jill and I re-ignited the Cancer Moonshot that President Obama asked me to lead in our Administration.
Our goal is to cut the cancer death rate by at least 50% over the next 25 years. Turn more cancers from death sentences into treatable diseases. And provide more support for patients and families.
It’s personal for so many of us.
Joining us are Maurice and Kandice, an Irishman and a daughter of immigrants from Panama.
They met and fell in love in New York City and got married in the same chapel as Jill and I did.
Kindred spirits.
He wrote us a letter about their little daughter Ava.
She was just a year old when she was diagnosed with a rare kidney cancer.
26 blood transfusions. 11 rounds of radiation. 8 rounds of chemo. 1 kidney removed.
A 5% survival rate.
He wrote how in the darkest moments he thought, “if she goes, I can’t stay.”
Jill and I understand, like so many of you.
They read how Jill described our family’s cancer journey and how we tried to steal moments of joy where you can.
For them, that glimmer of joy was a half-smile from their baby girl. It meant everything.
They never gave up hope.
Ava never gave up hope. She turns four next month.
They just found out that Ava beat the odds and is on her way to being cancer free, and she’s watching from the White House tonight.
For the lives we can save and for the lives we have lost, let this be a truly American moment that rallies the country and the world together and proves that we can do big things.
Twenty years ago, under the leadership of President Bush and countless advocates and champions, we undertook a bipartisan effort through PEPFAR to transform the global fight against HIV/AIDS. It’s been a huge success.
I believe we can do the same with cancer.
Let’s end cancer as we know it and cure some cancers once and for all.
There’s one reason why we’re able to do all of these things: our democracy itself.
It’s the most fundamental thing of all.
With democracy, everything is possible. Without it, nothing is.
For the last few years our democracy has been threatened, attacked, and put at risk.
Put to the test here, in this very room, on January 6th.
And then, just a few months ago, unhinged by the Big Lie, an assailant unleashed political violence in the home of the then-Speaker of this House of Representatives. Using the very same language that insurrectionists who stalked these halls chanted on January 6th.
Here tonight in this chamber is the man who bears the scars of that brutal attack, but is as tough and strong and as resilient as they get.
My friend, Paul Pelosi.
But such a heinous act never should have happened.
We must all speak out. There is no place for political violence in America. In America, we must protect the right to vote, not suppress that fundamental right. We honor the results of our elections, not subvert the will of the people. We must uphold the rule of the law and restore trust in our institutions of democracy.
And we must give hate and extremism in any form no safe harbor.
Democracy must not be a partisan issue. It must be an American issue.
Every generation of Americans has faced a moment where they have been called on to protect our democracy, to defend it, to stand up for it.
And this is our moment.
My fellow Americans, we meet tonight at an inflection point. One of those moments that only a few generations ever face, where the decisions we make now will decide the course of this nation and of the world for decades to come.
We are not bystanders to history. We are not powerless before the forces that confront us. It is within our power, of We the People. We are facing the test of our time and the time for choosing is at hand.
We must be the nation we have always been at our best. Optimistic. Hopeful. Forward-looking.
A nation that embraces, light over darkness, hope over fear, unity over division. Stability over chaos.
We must see each other not as enemies, but as fellow Americans. We are a good people, the only nation in the world built on an idea.
That all of us, every one of us, is created equal in the image of God. A nation that stands as a beacon to the world. A nation in a new age of possibilities.
So I have come here to fulfil my constitutional duty to report on the state of the union. And here is my report.
Because the soul of this nation is strong, because the backbone of this nation is strong, because the people of this nation are strong, the State of the Union is strong.
As I stand here tonight, I have never been more optimistic about the future of America. We just have to remember who we are.
We are the United States of America and there is nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together.
May God bless you all. May God protect our troops.


View Transcriptthank you. thank you very much, everybody. wow. thank you very, very much.vice president vance, speaker johnson, senator thune, chief justice roberts, justices of the supreme court of the united states, president clinton, president bush, president obama, president biden, vice president harris, and my fellow citizens, the golden age of america begins right now.from this day forward, our country will flourish and be respected again all over the world. we will be the envy of every nation, and we will not allow ourselves to be taken advantage of any longer. during every single day of the trump administration, i will, very simply, put america first.our sovereignty will be reclaimed. our safety will be restored. the scales of justice will be rebalanced. the vicious, violent, and unfair weaponization of the justice department and our government will end.and our top priority will be to create a nation that is proud, prosperous, and free.america will soon be greater, stronger, and far more exceptional than ever before.i return to the presidency confident and optimistic that we are at the start of a thrilling new era of national success. a tide of change is sweeping the country, sunlight is pouring over the entire world, and america has the chance to seize this opportunity like never before.but first, we must be honest about the challenges we face. while they are plentiful, they will be annihilated by this great momentum that the world is now witnessing in the united states of america.as we gather today, our government confronts a crisis of trust. for many years, a radical and corrupt establishment has extracted power and wealth from our citizens while the pillars of our society lay broken and seemingly in complete disrepair.we now have a government that cannot manage even a simple crisis at home while, at the same time, stumbling into a continuing catalogue of catastrophic events abroad.it fails to protect our magnificent, law-abiding american citizens but provides sanctuary and protection for dangerous criminals, many from prisons and mental institutions, that have illegally entered our country from all over the world.we have a government that has given unlimited funding to the defense of foreign borders but refuses to defend american borders or, more importantly, its own people.our country can no longer deliver basic services in times of emergency, as recently shown by the wonderful people of north carolina—who have been treated so badly—and other states who are still suffering from a hurricane that took place many months ago or, more recently, los angeles, where we are watching fires still tragically burn from weeks ago without even a token of defense. they’re raging through the houses and communities, even affecting some of the wealthiest and most powerful individuals in our country—some of whom are sitting here right now. they don’t have a home any longer. that’s interesting. but we can’t let this happen. everyone is unable to do anything about it. that’s going to change.we have a public health system that does not deliver in times of disaster, yet more money is spent on it than any country anywhere in the world.and we have an education system that teaches our children to be ashamed of themselves—in many cases, to hate our country despite the love that we try so desperately to provide to them. all of this will change starting today, and it will change very quickly.my recent election is a mandate to completely and totally reverse a horrible betrayal and all of these many betrayals that have taken place and to give the people back their faith, their wealth, their democracy, and, indeed, their freedom. from this moment on, america’s decline is over.our liberties and our nation’s glorious destiny will no longer be denied. and we will immediately restore the integrity, competency, and loyalty of america’s government.over the past eight years, i have been tested and challenged more than any president in our 250-year history, and i’ve learned a lot along the way.the journey to reclaim our republic has not been an easy one—that, i can tell you. those who wish to stop our cause have tried to take my freedom and, indeed, to take my life.just a few months ago, in a beautiful pennsylvania field, an assassin’s bullet ripped through my ear. but i felt then and believe even more so now that my life was saved for a reason. i was saved by god to make america great again.thank you. thank you.thank you very much.that is why each day under our administration of american patriots, we will be working to meet every crisis with dignity and power and strength. we will move with purpose and speed to bring back hope, prosperity, safety, and peace for citizens of every race, religion, color, and creed.for american citizens, january 20th, 2025, is liberation day. it is my hope that our recent presidential election will be remembered as the greatest and most consequential election in the history of our country.as our victory showed, the entire nation is rapidly unifying behind our agenda with dramatic increases in support from virtually every element of our society: young and old, men and women, african americans, hispanic americans, asian americans, urban, suburban, rural. and very importantly, we had a powerful win in all seven swing states and the popular vote, we won by millions of people.to the black and hispanic communities, i want to thank you for the tremendous outpouring of love and trust that you have shown me with your vote. we set records, and i will not forget it. i’ve heard your voices in the campaign, and i look forward to working with you in the years to come.today is martin luther king day. and his honor—this will be a great honor. but in his honor, we will strive together to make his dream a reality. we will make his dream come true.thank you. thank you. thank you.national unity is now returning to america, and confidence and pride is soaring like never before. in everything we do, my administration will be inspired by a strong pursuit of excellence and unrelenting success. we will not forget our country, we will not forget our constitution, and we will not forget our god. can’t do that.today, i will sign a series of historic executive orders. with these actions, we will begin the complete restoration of america and the revolution of common sense. it’s all about common sense.first, i will declare a national emergency at our southern border.all illegal entry will immediately be halted, and we will begin the process of returning millions and millions of criminal aliens back to the places from which they came. we will reinstate my remain in mexico policy.i will end the practice of catch and release.and i will send troops to the southern border to repel the disastrous invasion of our country.under the orders i sign today, we will also be designating the cartels as foreign terrorist organizations.and by invoking the alien enemies act of 1798, i will direct our government to use the full and immense power of federal and state law enforcement to eliminate the presence of all foreign gangs and criminal networks bringing devastating crime to us soil, including our cities and inner cities.as commander in chief, i have no higher responsibility than to defend our country from threats and invasions, and that is exactly what i am going to do. we will do it at a level that nobody has ever seen before.next, i will direct all members of my cabinet to marshal the vast powers at their disposal to defeat what was record inflation and rapidly bring down costs and prices.the inflation crisis was caused by massive overspending and escalating energy prices, and that is why today i will also declare a national energy emergency. we will drill, baby, drill.america will be a manufacturing nation once again, and we have something that no other manufacturing nation will ever have—the largest amount of oil and gas of any country on earth—and we are going to use it. we’ll use it.we will bring prices down, fill our strategic reserves up again right to the top, and export american energy all over the world.we will be a rich nation again, and it is that liquid gold under our feet that will help to do it.with my actions today, we will end the green new deal, and we will revoke the electric vehicle mandate, saving our auto industry and keeping my sacred pledge to our great american autoworkers.in other words, you’ll be able to buy the car of your choice.we will build automobiles in america again at a rate that nobody could have dreamt possible just a few years ago. and thank you to the autoworkers of our nation for your inspiring vote of confidence. we did tremendously with their vote.i will immediately begin the overhaul of our trade system to protect american workers and families. instead of taxing our citizens to enrich other countries, we will tariff and tax foreign countries to enrich our citizens.for this purpose, we are establishing the external revenue service to collect all tariffs, duties, and revenues. it will be massive amounts of money pouring into our treasury, coming from foreign sources.the american dream will soon be back and thriving like never before.to restore competence and effectiveness to our federal government, my administration will establish the brand-new department of government efficiency.after years and years of illegal and unconstitutional federal efforts to restrict free expression, i also will sign an executive order to immediately stop all government censorship and bring back free speech to america.never again will the immense power of the state be weaponized to persecute political opponents—something i know something about. we will not allow that to happen. it will not happen again.under my leadership, we will restore fair, equal, and impartial justice under the constitutional rule of law.and we are going to bring law and order back to our cities.this week, i will also end the government policy of trying to socially engineer race and gender into every aspect of public and private life. we will forge a society that is colorblind and merit-based.as of today, it will henceforth be the official policy of the united states government that there are only two genders: male and female.this week, i will reinstate any service members who were unjustly expelled from our military for objecting to the covid vaccine mandate with full back pay.and i will sign an order to stop our warriors from being subjected to radical political theories and social experiments while on duty. it’s going to end immediately. our armed forces will be freed to focus on their sole mission: defeating america’s enemies.like in 2017, we will again build the strongest military the world has ever seen. we will measure our success not only by the battles we win but also by the wars that we end—and perhaps most importantly, the wars we never get into.my proudest legacy will be that of a peacemaker and unifier. that’s what i want to be: a peacemaker and a unifier.i’m pleased to say that as of yesterday, one day before i assumed office, the hostages in the middle east are coming back home to their families.thank you.america will reclaim its rightful place as the greatest, most powerful, most respected nation on earth, inspiring the awe and admiration of the entire world.a short time from now, we are going to be changing the name of the gulf of mexico to the gulf of america, and we will restore the name of a great president, william mckinley, to mount mckinley, where it should be and where it belongs.president mckinley made our country very rich through tariffs and through talent—he was a natural businessman—and gave teddy roosevelt the money for many of the great things he did, including the panama canal, which has foolishly been given to the country of panama after the united spates—the united states, i mean, think of this—spent more money than ever spent on a project before and lost 38,000 lives in the building of the panama canal.we have been treated very badly from this foolish gift that should have never been made, and panama’s promise to us has been broken.the purpose of our deal and the spirit of our treaty has been totally violated. american ships are being severely overcharged and not treated fairly in any way, shape, or form. and that includes the united states navy.and above all, china is operating the panama canal. and we didn’t give it to china. we gave it to panama, and we’re taking it back.above all, my message to americans today is that it is time for us to once again act with courage, vigor, and the vitality of history’s greatest civilization.so, as we liberate our nation, we will lead it to new heights of victory and success. we will not be deterred. together, we will end the chronic disease epidemic and keep our children safe, healthy, and disease-free.the united states will once again consider itself a growing nation—one that increases our wealth, expands our territory, builds our cities, raises our expectations, and carries our flag into new and beautiful horizons.and we will pursue our manifest destiny into the stars, launching american astronauts to plant the stars and stripes on the planet mars.ambition is the lifeblood of a great nation, and, right now, our nation is more ambitious than any other. there’s no nation like our nation.americans are explorers, builders, innovators, entrepreneurs, and pioneers. the spirit of the frontier is written into our hearts. the call of the next great adventure resounds from within our souls.our american ancestors turned a small group of colonies on the edge of a vast continent into a mighty republic of the most extraordinary citizens on earth. no one comes close.americans pushed thousands of miles through a rugged land of untamed wilderness. they crossed deserts, scaled mountains, braved untold dangers, won the wild west, ended slavery, rescued millions from tyranny, lifted billions from poverty, harnessed electricity, split the atom, launched mankind into the heavens, and put the universe of human knowledge into the palm of the human hand. if we work together, there is nothing we cannot do and no dream we cannot achieve.many people thought it was impossible for me to stage such a historic political comeback. but as you see today, here i am. the american people have spoken.i stand before you now as proof that you should never believe that something is impossible to do. in america, the impossible is what we do best.from new york to los angeles, from philadelphia to phoenix, from chicago to miami, from houston to right here in washington, dc, our country was forged and built by the generations of patriots who gave everything they had for our rights and for our freedom.they were farmers and soldiers, cowboys and factory workers, steelworkers and coal miners, police officers and pioneers who pushed onward, marched forward, and let no obstacle defeat their spirit or their pride.together, they laid down the railroads, raised up the skyscrapers, built great highways, won two world wars, defeated fascism and communism, and triumphed over every single challenge that they faced.after all we have been through together, we stand on the verge of the four greatest years in american history. with your help, we will restore america promise and we will rebuild the nation that we love—and we love it so much.we are one people, one family, and one glorious nation under god. so, to every parent who dreams for their child and every child who dreams for their future, i am with you, i will fight for you, and i will win for you. we’re going to win like never before.thank you. thank you.thank you. thank you.in recent years, our nation has suffered greatly. but we are going to bring it back and make it great again, greater than ever before.we will be a nation like no other, full of compassion, courage, and exceptionalism. our power will stop all wars and bring a new spirit of unity to a world that has been angry, violent, and totally unpredictable.america will be respected again and admired again, including by people of religion, faith, and goodwill. we will be prosperous, we will be proud, we will be strong, and we will win like never before.we will not be conquered, we will not be intimidated, we will not be broken, and we will not fail. from this day on, the united states of america will be a free, sovereign, and independent nation.we will stand bravely, we will live proudly, we will dream boldly, and nothing will stand in our way because we are americans. the future is ours, and our golden age has just begun.thank you. god bless america. thank you all. thank you. thank you very much. thank you very much. thank you. Transcript
Good evening. Good evening. If I were smart, I’d go home now.Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, members of Congress, my fellow Americans.In January 1941, Franklin Roosevelt came to this chamber to speak to the nation. And he said, “I address you at a moment unprecedented in the history of the Union.” Hitler was on the march. War was raging in Europe.President Roosevelt’s purpose was to wake up Congress and alert the American people that this was no ordinary time. Freedom and democracy were under assault in the world.Tonight, I come to the same chamber to address the nation. Now it’s we who face an unprecedented moment in the history of the Union.And, yes, my purpose tonight is to wake up the Congress and alert the American people that this is no ordinary moment either. Not since President Lincoln and the Civil War have freedom and democracy been under assault at home as they are today.What makes our moment rare is that freedom and democracy are under attack at — both at home and overseas at the very same time.Overseas, Putin of Russia is on the march, invading Ukraine and sowing chaos throughout Europe and beyond.If anybody in this room thinks Putin will stop at Ukraine, I assure you: He will not.But Ukraine — Ukraine can stop Putin. Ukraine can stop Putin if we stand with Ukraine and provide the weapons that it needs to defend itself.That is all — that is all Ukraine is asking. They’re not asking for American soldiers. In fact, there are no American soldiers at war in Ukraine, and I’m determined to keep it that way.But now assistance to Ukraine is being blocked by those who want to walk away from our world leadership.It wasn’t long ago when a Republican president named Ronald Reagan thundered, “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall.”Now — now my predecessor, a former Republican president, tells Putin, quote, “Do whatever the hell you want.”That’s a quote.A former president actually said that — bowing down to a Russian leader. I think it’s outrageous, it’s dangerous, and it’s unacceptable.America is a founding member of NATO, the military alliance of democratic nations created after World War Two prevent — to prevent war and keep the peace.And today, we’ve made NATO stronger than ever. We welcomed Finland to the Alliance last year. And just this morning, Sweden officially joined, and their minister is here tonight. Stand up. Welcome. Welcome, welcome, welcome. And they know how to fight.Mr. Prime Minister, welcome to NATO, the strongest military alliance the world has ever seen.I say this to Congress: We have to stand up to Putin. Send me a bipartisan national security bill. History is literally watching. History is watching.If the United States walks away, it will put Ukraine at risk. Europe is at risk. The free world will be at risk, emboldening others to do what they wish to do us harm.My message to President Putin, who I’ve known for a long time, is simple: We will not walk away. We will not bow down. I will not bow down.In a literal sense, history is watching. History is watching — just like history watched three years ago on January 6th — when insurrectionists stormed this very Capitol and placed a dagger to the throat of American democracy.Many of you were here on that darkest of days. We all saw with our own eyes the insurrectionists were not patriots. They had come to stop the peaceful transfer of power, to overturn the will of the people.January 6th lies about the 2020 election and the plots to steal the election posed a great — gravest threat to U.S. democracy since the Civil War.But they failed. America stood — America stood strong and democracy prevailed. We must be honest: The threat to democracy must be [defeated].My predecessor and some of you here seek to bury the truth about January 6th. I will not do that.This is a moment to speak the truth and to bury the lies. Here’s the simple truth: You can’t love your country only when you win.As I’ve done ever since being elected to office, I ask all of you, without regard to party, to join together and defend democracy. Remember your oath of office to defend againstall threats foreign and domestic.Respect — respect free and fair elections, restore trust in our institutions, and make clear political violence has absolutely no place — no place in America. Zero place.Again, it’s not — it’s not hyperbole to suggest history is watching. They’re watching. Your children and grandchildren will read about this day and what we do.History is watching another assault on freedom. Joining us [tonight] is Latorya Beasley, a social worker from Birmingham, Alabama.Fourteen months ago — fourteen months ago, she and her husband welcomed a baby girl thanks to the miracle of IVF. She scheduled treatments to have that second child, but the Alabama Supreme Court shut down IVF treatments across the state, unleashed by a Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade. She was told her dream would have to wait.What her family had gone through should never have happened. Unless Congress acts, it could happen again.So, tonight, let’s stand up for families like hers. To my friends across the aisle — don’t keep this waiting any longer. Guarantee the right to IVF. Guarantee it nationwide.Like most Americans, I believe Roe v. Wade got it right.I thank Vice President Harris for being an incredible leader defending reproductive freedom and so much more. Thank you.My predecessor came to office determined to see Roe v. Wade overturned. He’s the reason it was overturned, and he brags about it. Look at the chaos that has resulted.Joining us tonight is Kate Cox, a wife and mother from Dallas. She’d become pregnant again and had a fetus with a fatal condition. Her doctor told Kate that her own life and her ability to have future in the fil- — children in the future were at risk if she didn’t act. Because Texas law banned her ability to act, Kate and her husband had to leave the state to get what she needed.What her family had gone through should have never happened as well. But it’s happening to too many others.There are state laws banning the freedom to choose, criminalizing doctors, forcing survivors of rape and incest to leave their states to get the treatment they need.Many of you in this chamber and my predecessor are promising to pass a national ban on reproductive freedom.My God, what freedom else would you take away?Look, its decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court majority wrote the following — and with all due respect, Justices — “Women are not without electoral — electoral power” — excuse me — “electoral or political power.”You’re about to realize just how much you were right about that.Clearly — clearly, those bragging about overturning Roe v. Wade have no clue about the power of women.But they found out. When reproductive freedom was on the ballot, we won in 2022 and 2023. And we’ll win again in 2024.If you — if you, the American people, send me a Congress that supports the right to choose, I promise you I will restore Roe v. Wade as the law of the land again.Folks, America cannot go back.I am here to- — tonight to show what I believe is the way forward, because I know how far we’ve come.Four years ago next week, before I came to office, the country was hit by the worst pandemic and the worst economic crisis in a century.Remember the fear, record losses?Remember the spikes in crime and the murder rate? A raging virus that took more than 1 million American lives of loved ones, millions left behind.A mental health crisis of isolation and loneliness.A president, my predecessor, failed in the most basic presidential duty that he owes to American people: the duty to care.I think that’s unforgivable.I came to office determined to get us through one of the toughest periods in the nation’s history. We have.It doesn’t make new, but in a — news — in a thousand cities and towns, the American people are writing the greatest comeback story never told.So, let’s tell the story here — tell it here and now.America’s comeback is building a future of American possibilities; building an economy from the middle out and the bottom up, not the top down; investing in all of America, in all Americans to make every- — sure everyone has a fair shot and we leave no one — no one behind.The pandemic no longer controls our lives. The vaccine that saved us from COVID is — are now being used to beat cancer.Turning setback into comeback. That’s what America does. That’s what America does.Folks, I inherited an economy that was on the brink. Now, our economy is literally the envy of the world.Fifteen million new jobs in just three years. A record. A record.Unemployment at 50-year lows.A record 16 million Americans are starting small businesses, and each one is a literal act of hope, with historic job growth and small-business growth for Black and Hispanics and Asian Americans. Eight hundred thousand new manufacturing jobs in America and counting.Where is it written we can’t be the manufacturing capital of the world? We are and we will.More people have health insurance today — more people have health insurance today than ever before.The racial wealth gap is the smallest it’s been in 20 years.Wages keep going up. Inflation keeps coming down. Inflation has dropped from 9 percent to 3 percent — the lowest in the world and [trending] lower.The landing is and will be soft. And now, instead of — importing foreign products and exporting American jobs, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs — right here in America, where they belong.And it takes time, but the American people are beginning to feel it. Consumer studies show consumer confidence is soaring.“Buy America” has been the law of the land since the 1930s. Past administrations, including my predecessor — including some Democrats, as well, in the past — failed to buy American. Not anymore.On my watch, federal projects that you fund — like helping build American roads, bridges, and highways — will be made with American products and built by American workers — creating good-paying American jobs.And thanks to our CHIPS and Science Act — the United States is investing more in research and development than ever before. During the pandemic, a shortage of semiconductors, chips that drove up the price of everything from cell phones to automobiles — and, by the way, we invented those chips right here in America.Well, instead of having to import them, instead of — private companies are now investing billions of dollars to build new chip factories here in America — creating tens of thousands of jobs, many of those jobs paying $100,000 a year and don’t require a college degree.In fact, my policies have attracted $650 billion in private-sector investment in clean energy, advanced manufacturing, creating tens of thousands of jobs here in America.And thanks — and thanks to our Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, 46,000 new projects have been announced all across your communities.And, by the way, I noticed some of you who’ve strongly voted against it are there cheering on that money coming in. And I like it. I’m with you. I’m with you.And if any of you don’t want that money in your district, just let me know.Modernizing our roads and bridges, ports and airports, public transit systems. Removing poi- — poisonous lead pipes so every child can drink clean water without risk of brain damage.Providing affordable — affordable high-speed Internet for every American, no matter where you live — urban, suburban, or rural communities in red states and blue states.Record investments in Tribal communities.Because of my investment in family farms — because I invested in family farms — led by my Secretary of Agriculture, who knows more about this anybody I know — we’re better able to stay in the family for the — those farms so their — and their children and grandchildren won’t have to leave — leave home to make a living. It’s transformative.The great comeback story is Belvidere, Illinois. Home to an auto plant for nearly 60 years. Before I came to office, the plant was on its way to shutting down. Thousands of workers feared for their livelihoods. Hope was fading.Then, I was elected to office, and we raised Belvidere repeatedly with auto companies, knowing unions would make all the difference. The UAW worked like hell to keep the plant open and get these jobs back. And together, we succeeded.Instead of auto factories shutting down, auto factories are reopening and a new state-of-the-art battery factory is being built to power those cars there at the same.To the folks — to the folks of Belvidere, I’d say: Instead of your town being left behind, your community is moving forward again. Because instead of watching auto ja- — jobs of the future go overseas, 4,000 union jobs with higher wages are building a future in Belvidere right here in America.Here tonight is UAW President Shawn Fain, a great friend and a great labor leader. Shawn, where are you? Stand up.And — and Dawn — and Dawn Simms, a third-generation worker — UAW worker at Belvidere.Shawn, I was proud to be the first President to stand in the picket line. And today, Dawn has a good job in her hometown, providing stability for her family and pride and dignity as well.Showing once again Wall Street didn’t build America. They’re not bad guys. They didn’t build it, though. The middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class.I say to the American people: When America gets knocked down, we get back up. We keep going. That’s America. That’s you, the American people.It’s because of you America is coming back. It’s because of you our future is brighter. It’s because of you that tonight we can proudly say the state of our Union is strong and getting stronger.Tonight — tonight, I want to talk about the future of possibilities that we can build together — a future where the days of trickle-down economics are over and the wealthy and the biggest corporations no longer get the — all the tax breaks.And, by the way, I understand corporations. I come from a state that has more corporations invested than every one of your states in the state — the United States combined. And I represented it for 36 years. I’m not anti-corporation.But I grew up in a home where trickle-down economics didn’t put much on my dad’s kitchen table. That’s why I’m determined to turn things around so the middle class does well. When they do well, the poor have a way up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well.And there’s more to do to make sure you’re feeling the benefits of all we’re doing.Americans pay more for prescription drugs than anywhere in the world. It’s wrong, and I’m ending it.With a law that I proposed and signed — and not one of your Republican buddies work- — voted for it — we finally beat Big Pharma.Instead of paying $400 a month or thereabouts for insulin with diabetes — and it only costs 10 bucks to make — they only get paid $35 a month now and still make a healthy profit.And I want to — and what to do next, I want to cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month for every American who needs it — everyone.For years, people have talked about it. But finally, we got it done and gave Medicare the power to negotiate lower prices on prescription drugs, just like the VA is able to do for veterans.That’s not just saving seniors money. It’s saving taxpayers money. We cut the federal deficit by $160 billion — because Medicare will no longer have to pay those exorbitant prices to Big Pharma.This year, Medicare is negotiating lower prices for some of the costliest drugs on the market that treat everything from heart disease to arthritis. It’s now time to go further and give Medicare the power to negotiate lower prices for 500 different drugs over the next decade.They’re making a lot of money, guys. And they’ll still be extremely profitable. It will not only save lives; it will save taxpayers another $200 billion.Starting next year, the same law caps total prescription drug costs for seniors on Medicare at $200 — at $2,000 a year, even for expensive cancer drugs that cost $10-, $12-, $15,000. Now I want to cap prescription drug costs at $2,000 a year for everyone.Folks, I’m going to get in trouble for saying that, but any of you want to get in Air Force One with me and fly to Toronto, Berlin, Moscow — I mean, excuse me. Well, even Moscow, probably. And bring your prescription with you, and I promise you, I’ll get it for you for 40 percent the cost you’re paying now. Same company, same drug, same place.Folks, the Affordable Care Act — the old “Obamacare” — is still a very big deal.Over 100 million of you can no longer be denied health insurance because of a preexisting condition. But my predecessor and many in this chamber want to take the — that prescription drug away by repealing Affordable Care Act.I’m not going to let that happen. We stopped you 50 times before, and we’ll stop you again.In fact, I’m not only protecting it, I’m expanding it. The — we enacted tax credits of $800 per person per year [to] reduce healthcare costs for millions of working families. That tax credit expires next year. I want to make that savings permanent.To state the obvious: Women are more than half of our population, but research on women’s health has always been underfunded.That’s why we’re launching the first-ever White House Initiative on Women’s Health Research, led by Jill — doing an incredible job as First Lady — to pa- — to pass my plan for $12 billion to transform women’s health research and benefit millions of lives all across America.I know the cost of housing is so important to you. Inflation keeps coming down. Mortgage rates will come down as well, and the Fed acknowledges that.But I’m not waiting. I want to provide an annual tax credit that will give Americans $400 a month for the next two years as mortgage rates come down to put toward their mortgages when they buy their first home or trade up for a little more space. That’s for two years.And my administration is also eliminating title insurance [fees] on federally backed mortgages. When you refinance your home, you can save $1,000 or more as a consequence.For millions of renters, we’re cracking down on big landlords who use antitrust law — using antitrust — who break antitrust laws — — by price-fixing and driving up rents.We’ve cut red tape so builders can get federally financing, which is already helping build a record 1.7 million new house u- — housing units nationwide.Now pass — now pass [my plan] and build and renovate 2 million affordable homes and bring those rents down.To remain the strongest economy in the world, we need to have the best education system in the world. And I, like I suspect all of you, want to give a child — every child a good start by providing access to preschool for three- and four-years-old.You know, I think I pointed out last year — I think I pointed out last year that children coming from broken homes where there’s no books, they’re not read to, they’re not spoken to very often start school — kindergarten or first grade hearing — having heard a million fewer words spoken.Well, studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50 percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a two- and four-year degree no matter what their background is.I met a year and a half ago with the leaders of the Business Roundtable. They were mad that I was ever — angry — I — well, they were discussing — — why I wanted to spend money on education.I pointed out to them: As Vice President, I met with over 8- — I think it was 182 of those folks — don’t hold me to the exact number — and I asked them what they need most — the CEOs. And you’ve had the same experience on both sides of the aisle. They say, “A better-educated workforce,” right?So, I looked at them. And I say, “I come from Delaware. DuPont used to be the eighth-largest corporation in the world. And every new enter- — enterprise they bought, they educated the workforce to that enterprise. But none of you do that anymore. Why are you angry with me providing you the opportunity for the best-educated workforce in the world?”And they all looked at me and said, “I think you’re right.”I want to expand high-quality tutoring and summer learning to see that every child learns to read by third grade.I’m also connecting local businesses and high schools so students get hands-on experience and a path to a good-paying job whether or not they go to college.And I want to make sure that college is more affordable. Let’s continue increasing the Pell Grants to working- and middle-class families and increase record investments in HBCUs and minority-serving institutions, including Hispanic institutions.When I was told I couldn’t universally just change the way in which we did — dealt with student loans, I fixed two student loan programs that already existed to reduce the burden of student debt for nearly 4 million Americans, including nurses, firefighters — — and others in public service.Like Keenan Jones, a public educator in Minnesota, who’s here with us tonight. Keenan, where are you? Keenan, thank you.He’s educated hundreds of students so they can go to college. Now he’s able to help, after debt forgiveness, get his own daughter to college.And, folks, look, such relief is good for the economy because folks are now able to buy a home, start a business, start a family.And while we’re at it, I want to give public school teachers a raise.And, by the way, the first couple of years, we cut the deficit.Now let me speak to the question of fundamental fairness for all Americans. I’ve been delivering real results in fiscally responsible ways. We’ve already cut the federal deficit — we’ve already cut the federal deficit by over $1 trillion.I signed a bipartisan deal to cut another trillion dollars in the next decade.It’s my goal to cut the federal deficit another $3 trillion by making big corporations and the very wealthy finally beginning to pay their fair share.Look, I’m a capitalist. If you want to make or can make a million or millions of bucks, that’s great. Just pay your fair share in taxes.A fair tax code is how we invest in things that make this country great: healthcare, education, defense, and so much more.But here’s the deal. The last administration enacted a $2 trillion tax cut overwhelmingly benefit the top 1 percent — the very wealthy — and the biggest corporations — and exploded the federal deficit.They added more to the national debt than any presidential term in American history. Check the numbers.Folks at home, does anybody really think the tax code is fair?Do you really think the wealthy and big corporations need another $2 trillion tax break?I sure don’t. I’m going to keep fighting like hell to make it fair. Under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in federal taxes — — nobody — not one penny. And they haven’t yet.In fact, the Child Tax Credit I passed during the pandemic cut taxes for millions of working families and cut child poverty in half.Restore that Child Tax Credit. No child should go hungry in this country.The way to make the tax code fair is to make big corporations and the very wealthy begin to pay their share. Remember in 2020, 55 of the biggest companies in America made $40 billion and paid zero in federal income tax. Zero.Not anymore.Thanks to the law I wrote and we signed, big companies now have to pay a minimum of 15 percent. But that’s still less than working people pay in federal taxes.It’s time to raise the corporate minimum tax to at least 21 percent — so every big corporation finally begins to pay their fair share.I also want to end tax breaks for Big Pharma, Big Oil, private jets, massive executive pay when it was only supposed to be a million bal- — a million dollars that could be deducted. They can pay them $20 million if they want, but deduct a million.End it now.You know, there are 1,000 billionaires in America. You know what the average federal tax is for those billionaires?No.They’re making great sacrifices — 8.2 percent.That’s far less than the vast majority of Americans pay.No billionaire should pay a lower federal tax rate than a teacher, a sanitation worker, or a nurse.I proposed a minimum tax for billionaires of 25 percent — just 25 percent. You know what that would raise? That would raise $500 billion over the next 10 years.And imagine what that could do for America. Imagine a future with affordable childcare, millions of families can get what they need to go to work to help grow the economy.Imagine a future with paid leave, because no one should have to choose between working and taking care of their sick family member.Imagine — imagine a future with home care and eldercare, and people living with disabilities so they can stay in their homes and family caregivers can finally get the pay they deserve.Tonight, let’s all agree once again to stand up for seniors.Many of my friends on the other side of the aisle want to put Social Security on the chopping block.If anyone here tries to cut Social Security or Medicare or raise the retirement age, I will stop you.The working people — the working people who built this country pay more into Social Security than millionaires and billionaires do. It’s not fair.We have two ways to go. Republicans can cut Social Security and give more tax breaks to the wealthy. I will —That’s the proposal. Oh, no? You guys don’t want another $2 trillion tax cut?I kind of thought that’s what your plan was. Well, that’s good to hear. You’re not going to cut another $2 trillion for the super-wealthy? That’s good to hear.I’ll protect and strengthen Social Security and make the wealthy pay their fair share.Look, too many corporations raise prices to pad their profits, charging more and more for less and less.That’s why we’re cracking down on corporations that engage in price gouging and deceptive pricing, from food to healthcare to housing.In fact, the snack companies think you won’t notice if they change the size of the bag and put a hell of a lot fewer — same — same size bag — put fewer chips in it. No, I’m not joking. It’s called “shrink-flation.”Pass Bobby Casey’s bill and stop this. I really mean it.You probably all saw that commercial on Snickers bars. And you get — you get charged the same amount, and you got about, I don’t know, 10 percent fewer Snickers in it.Look, I’m also getting rid of junk fees — those hidden fees — at the end of your bill that are there without your knowledge. My administration announced we’re cutting credit card late fees from $32 to $8.Banks and credit card companies are allowed to charge what it costs them to instigate the collection. And that’s more — a hell of a lot like $8 than 30-some dollars.But they don’t like it. The credit card companies don’t like it, but I’m saving American families $20 billion a year with all of the junk fees I’m eliminating.Folks at home, that’s why the banks are so mad. It’s $20 billion in profit.I’m not stopping there.My administration has proposed rules to make cable, travel, utilities, and online ticket sellers tell you the total price up front so there are no surprises.It matters. It matters.And so does this. In November, my team began serious negotiations with a bipartisan group of senators. The result was a bipartisan bill with the toughest set of border security reforms we’ve ever seen.Oh, you don’t think so?Oh, you don’t like that bill — huh? — that conservatives got together and said was a good bill? I’ll be darned. That’s amazing.That bipartisan bill would hire 1,500 more security agents and officers, 100 more immigration judges to help tackle the backload of 2 million cases, 4,300 more asylum officers, and new policies so they can resolve cases in six months instead of six years now. What are you against?One hundred more high-tech drug detection machines to significantly increase the ability to screen and stop vehicles smuggling fentanyl into America that’s killing thousands of children.This bill would save lives and bring order to the border.It would also give me and any new president new emergency authority to temporarily shut down the border when the number of migrants at the border is overwhelming.The Border Patrol union has endorsed this bill.The federal Chamber of Commerce has — yeah, yeah. You’re saying “no.” Look at the facts. I know — I know you know how to read.I believe that given the opportunity — for — a majority in the House and Senate would endorse the bill as well — a majority right now.But unfortunately, politics have derailed this bill so far.I’m told my predecessor called members of Congress in the Senate to demand they block the bill. He feels political win — he viewed it as a — it would be a political win for me and a political loser for him. It’s not about him. It’s not about me. I’d be a winner — not really. I —(The President holds up a pin reading “Say Her Name, Laken Riley.”) Lanken — Lanken [Laken] Riley, an innocent young woman who was killed.By an illegal. That’s right. But how many of thousands of people are being killed by legals?To her parents, I say: My heart goes out to you. Having lost children myself, I understand.But, look, if we change the dynamic at the border — people pay people — people pay these smugglers 8,000 bucks to get across the border because they know if they get by — if they get by and let into the country, it’s six to eight years before they have a hearing. And it’s worth the — taking the chance of the $8,000.But — but if it’s only six mon- — six weeks, the idea is it’s highly unlikely that people will pay that money and come all that way knowing that they’ll be — able to be kicked out quickly.Folks, I would respectfully su- — suggest to my friend in — my Republican friends owe it to the American people. Get this bill done. We need to act now.And if my predecessor is watching: Instead of paying [playing] politics and pressuring members of Congress to block the bill, join me in telling the Congress to pass it.We can do it together.But that’s what he apparently — here’s what he will not do.I will not demonize immigrants, saying they are “poison in the blood of our country.”I will not separate families.I will not ban people because of their faith.Unlike my predecessor, on my first day in office, I introduced a comprehensive bill to fix our immigration system. Take a look at it. It has all these and more: secure the border, provide a pathway to citizenship for DREAMers, and so much more.But unlike my predecessor, I know who we are as Americans. We’re the only nation in the world with a heart and soul that draws from old and new.Home to Native Americans whose ancestors have been here for thousands of years. Home to people of every pla- — from every place on Earth.They came freely. Some came in chains. Some came when famine struck, like my ancestral family in Ireland. Some to flee persecution, to chase dreams that are impossible anywhere but here in America.That’s America. And we all come from somewhere, but we’re all Americans.Look, folks, we have a simple choice: We can fight about fixing the border or we can fix it. I’m ready to fix it. Send me the border bill now.A transformational his- — moment in history happened 58 — 59 years ago today in Selma, Alabama. Hundreds of foot soldiers for justice marched across the Edmund Pettus Bridge, named after the Grand Dragon of the Ku Klux Klan, to claim their fundamental right to vote.They were beaten. They were bloodied and left for dead. Our late friend and former colleague John Lewis was on that march. We miss him.But joining us tonight are other marchers, both in the gallery and on the floor, including Bettie Mae Fikes, known as the “Voice of Selma.”The daughter of gospel singers and preachers, she sang songs of prayer and protest on that Bloody Sunday to help shake the nation’s conscience.Five months later, the Voting Rights Act passed and was signed into law.Thank you. Thank you, thank you, thank you.But 59 years later, there are forces taking us back in time: voter suppression, election subversion, unlimited dark money, extreme gerrymandering.John Lewis was a great friend to many of us here. But if you truly want to honor him and all the heroes who marched with him, then it’s time to do more than talk.Pass the Freedom to Vote Act, the John Lewis Voting Right[s] Act.And stop — stop denying another core value of America: our diversity across American life. Banning books is wrong. Instead of erasing history, let’s make history.I want to protect fundamental rights.Pass the Equality Act.And my message to transgender Americans: I have your back.Pass the PRO Act for workers’ rights.Raise the federal minimum wage, because every worker has the right to a decent living more than eig- — seven bucks an hour.We’re also making history by confronting the climate crisis, not denying it. I don’t think any of you think there’s no longer a climate crisis. At least, I hope you don’t.I’m taking the most significant action ever on climate in the history of the world.I’m cutting our carbon emissions in half by 2030; creating tens of thousands of clean energy jobs, like the IBEW workers building and installing 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations — ; conserving 30 percent of America’s lands and waters by 2030; and taking action on environmental justice — fence-line communities smothered by the legacy of pollution.And patterned after the Peace Corps and AmericaCorps [AmeriCorps], I launched the Climate Corps — — to put 20,000 young people to work in the forefront of our clean energy future. I’ll triple that number in a decade.To state the obvious, all Americans deserve the freedom to be safe. And America is safer today than when I took office.The year before I took office, murder rates went up 30 percent.Thirty percent, they went up — the biggest increase in history.It was then, through no — through my American Rescue Plan — which every American [Republican] voted against, I might add — we made the largest investment in public safety ever.Last year, the murder rate saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime fell to one of its lowest levels in more than 50 years.But we have more to do. We have to help cities invest in more community police officers, more mental health workers, more community violence intervention.Give communities the tools to crack down on gun crime, retail crime, and carjacking. Keep building trust, as I’ve been doing, by taking executive action on police reform and calling for it to be the law of the land.Directing my Cabinet to review the federal classification of marijuana and expunging thousands of convictions for the mere possession, because no one should be jailed for simply using or have it on their record.Take on crimes of domestic violence. I’m ramping up the federal enforcement of the Violence Against Women Act that I proudly wrote when I was a senator so we can finally — finally end the scourge against women in America.There are other kinds of violence I want to stop.With us tonight is Jasmine, whose nine-year-old sister Jackie was murdered with 21 classmates and teachers in her elementary school in Uvalde, Texas.Very soon after that happened, Jill and I went to Uvalde for a couple days. We spent hours and hours with each of the families. We heard their message so everyone in this room, in this chamber could hear the same message.The constant refrain — and I was there for hours, meeting with every family. They said, “Do something.” “Do something.”Well, I did do something by establishing the first-ever Office of Gun Violence Prevention in the White House, that the Vice President is leading the charge. Thank you for doing it.Meanwhile — meanwhile, my predecessor told the NRA he’s proud he did nothing on guns when he was President.After another shooting in Iowa recently, he said — when asked what to do about it, he said, just “get over it.” That was his quote. Just “get over it.”I say stop it. Stop it, stop it, stop it.I’m proud we beat the NRA when I signed the most significant gun safety law in nearly 30 years because of this Congress. We now must beat the NRA again.I’m demanding a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. Pass universal background checks.None of this — none of this — I taught the Second Amendment for 12 years. None of this violates the Second Amendment or vilifies responsible gun owners.You know, as we manage challenges at home, we’re also managing crises abroad, including in the Middle East.I know the last five months have been gut-wrenching for so many people — for the Israeli people, for the Palestinian people, and so many here in America.This crisis began on October 7th with a massacre by a terrorist group called Hamas, as you all know. One thousand two hundred innocent people — women and girls, men and boys — slaughtered after enduring sexual violence. The deadliest day of the — for the Jewish people since the Holocaust. And 250 hostages taken.Here in this chamber tonight are families whose loved ones are still being held by Hamas. I pledge to all the families that we will not rest until we bring every one of your loved ones home.We also — we will also work around the clock to bring home Evan and Paul — Americans being unjustly detained by the Russians — and others around the world.Israel has a right to go after Hamas. Hamas ended this conflict by releasing the hostages, laying down arms — could end it by — by releasing the hostages, laying down arms, and s- — surrendering those responsible for October 7th.But Israel has a h- — excuse me. Israel has a added burden because Hamas hides and operates among the civilian population like cowards — under hospitals, daycare centers, and all the like.Israel also has a fundamental responsibility, though, to protect innocent civilians in Gaza.This war has taken a greater toll on innocent civilians than all previous wars in Gaza combined. More than 30,000 Palestinians have been killed — most of whom are not Hamas. Thousands and thousands of innocents — women and children. Girls and boys also orphaned.Nearly 2 million more Palestinians under bombardment or displacement. Homes destroyed, neighborhoods in rubble, cities in ruin. Families without food, water, medicine.It’s heartbreaking.I’ve been working non-stop to establish an immediate ceasefire that would last for six weeks to get all the prisoners released — all the hostages released and to get the hostages home and to ease the intolerable an- — humanitarian crisis and build toward an enduring — a more — something more enduring.The United States has been leading international efforts to get more humanitarian assistance into Gaza. Tonight, I’m directing the U.S. military to lead an emergency mission to establish a temporary pier in the Mediterranean on the coast of Gaza that can receive large shipments carrying food, water, medicine, and temporary shelters.No U.S. boots will be on the ground.A temporary pier will enable a massive increase in the amount of humanitarian assistance getting into Gaza every day.And Israel must also do its part. Israel must allow more aid into Gaza and ensure humanitarian workers aren’t caught in the crossfire.And they’re announcing they’re going to — they’re going to ca- — have a crossing in Northern Gaza.To the leadership of Israel, I say this: Humanitarian assistance cannot be a secondary consideration or a bargaining chip. Protecting and saving innocent lives has to be a priority.As we look to the future, the only real solution to the situation is a two-state solution over time.And I say this as a lifelong supporter of Israel, my entire career. No one has a stronger record with Israel than I do. I challenge any of you here. I’m the only American president to visit Israel in wartime.But there is no other path that guarantees Israel’s security and democracy. There is no other path that guarantees Pa- — that Palestinians can live in peace with po- — with peace and dignity.And there is no other path that guarantees peace between Israel and all of its neighbors — including Saudi Arabia, with whom I’m talking.Creating stability in the Middle East also means containing the threat posed by Iran. That’s why I built a coalition of more than a dozen countries to defend international shipping and freedom of navigation in the Red Sea.I’ve ordered strikes to degrade the Houthi capability and defend U.S. forces in the region.As Commander-in-Chief, I will not hesitate to direct further measures to protect our people and our military personnel.For years, I’ve heard many of my Republican and Democratic friends say that China is on the rise and America is falling behind. They’ve got it backwards. I’ve been saying it for over four years, even when I wasn’t president.America is rising. We have the best economy in the world. And since I’ve come to office, our GTB [GDP] is up, our trade deficit with China is down to the lowest point in over a decade.And we’re standing up against China’s unfair economic practices.We’re standing up for peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits.I’ve revitalized our partnership and alliance in the Pacific: India, Australia, Japan, South Korea, the Pacific Islands. I’ve made sure that the most advanced American technologies can’t be used in China — not allowing to trade them there.Frankly, for all his tough talk on China, it never occurred to my predecessor to do any of that.I want competition with China, not conflict. And we’re in a stronger position to win the conflict [competition] of the 21st century against China than anyone else for that matter — than at any time as well.Here at home, I’ve signed over 400 bipartisan bills. But there’s more to pass my Unity Agenda.Strengthen penalties on fentanyl trafficking. You don’t want to do that, huh?Pass bipartisan privacy legislation to protect our children online.Harness — harness the promise of AI to protect us from peril. Ban AI voice impersonations and more.And keep our truly sacred obligation to train and equip those we send into harm’s way and care for them and their families when they come home and when they don’t.That’s why, with the strong support and help of Denis and the VA, I signed the PACT Act — — one of the most significant laws ever, helping millions of veterans exposed to toxins who now are battling more than 100 different cancers. Many of them don’t come home, but we owe them and their families support.And we owe it to ourselves to keep supporting our new health research agency called ARPA-H — — and remind us — to remind us that we can do big things, like end cancer as we know it. And we will.Let me close with this.Yay! (Applause and laughter.)I know you don’t want to hear anymore, Lindsey, but I got to say a few more things.I know I may not look like it, but I’ve been around a while. When you get to be my age, certain things become clearer than ever.I know the American story. Again and again, I’ve seen the contest between competing forces in the battle for the soul of our nation, between those who want to pull America back to the past and those who want to move America into the future.My lifetime has taught me to embrace freedom and democracy, a future based on core values that have defined America — honesty, decency, dignity, and equality — ; to respect everyone; to give everyone a fair shot; to give hate no safe harbor.Now, other people my age see it differently. The American story of resentment, revenge, and retribution.That’s not me. I was born amid World War Two, when America stood for the freedom of the world. I grew up in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and Claymont, Delaware, among working-class people who built this country.I watched in horror as two of my heroes — like many of you did — Dr. King and Bobby Kennedy, were assassinated. And their legacies inspired me to pur- — pursue a career in service.I left a law firm and became a public defender because my city of Wilmington was the only city in America occupied by the National Guard after Dr. King was assassinated because of the riots. And I became a county councilman almost by accident.I got elected to the United States Senate when I had no intention of running, at age 29.Then vice president to our first Black president. Now a president to the first woman vice president.In my career, I’ve been told I was too young. By the way, they didn’t let me on the Senate elevators for votes sometimes. They — not a joke.And I’ve been told I am too old.Whether young or old, I’ve always been known — I’ve always known what endures. I’ve known our North Star. The very idea of America is that we’re all created equal, deserves to be treated equally throughout our lives.We’ve never fully lived up to that idea, but we’ve never walked away from it either. And I won’t walk away from it now.I’m optimistic. I really am. I’m optimistic, Nancy.My fellow Americans, the issue facing our nation isn’t how old we are; it’s how old are our ideas.Hate, anger, revenge, retribution are the oldest of ideas. But you can’t lead America with ancient ideas that only take us back. To lead America, the land of possibilities, you need a vision for the future and what can and should be done.Tonight, you’ve heard mine.I see a future where [we’re] defending democracy, you don’t diminish it.I see a future where we restore the right to choose and protect our freedoms, not take them away.I see a future where the middle class has — finally has a fair shot and the wealthy have to pay their fair share in taxes.I see a future where we save the planet from the climate crisis and our country from gun violence.Above all, I see a future for all Americans. I see a country for all Americans. And I will always be President for all Americans because I believe in America. I believe in you, the American people. You’re the reason we’ve never been more optimistic about our future than I am now.So, let’s build the future together. Let’s remember who we are.We are the United States of America. And there is nothing — nothing beyond our capacity when we act together.God bless you all. And may God protect our troops. Thank you, thank you, thank you.


View TranscriptTranscript
Chief Justice Roberts, Vice President Harris, Speaker Pelosi, Leader Schumer, Leader McConnell, Vice President Pence, distinguished guests, and my fellow Americans.
This is America’s day.
This is democracy’s day.
A day of history and hope.
Of renewal and resolve.
Through a crucible for the ages America has been tested anew and America has risen to the challenge.
Today, we celebrate the triumph not of a candidate, but of a cause, the cause of democracy.
The will of the people has been heard and the will of the people has been heeded.
We have learned again that democracy is precious.
Democracy is fragile.
And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.
So now, on this hallowed ground where just days ago violence sought to shake this Capitol’s very foundation, we come together as one nation, under God, indivisible, to carry out the peaceful transfer of power as we have for more than two centuries.
We look ahead in our uniquely American way – restless, bold, optimistic – and set our sights on the nation we know we can be and we must be.
I thank my predecessors of both parties for their presence here.
I thank them from the bottom of my heart.
You know the resilience of our Constitution and the strength of our nation.
As does President Carter, who I spoke to last night but who cannot be with us today, but whom we salute for his lifetime of service.
I have just taken the sacred oath each of these patriots took — an oath first sworn by George Washington.
But the American story depends not on any one of us, not on some of us, but on all of us.
On “We the People” who seek a more perfect Union.
This is a great nation and we are a good people.
Over the centuries through storm and strife, in peace and in war, we have come so far. But we still have far to go.
We will press forward with speed and urgency, for we have much to do in this winter of peril and possibility.
Much to repair.
Much to restore.
Much to heal.
Much to build.
And much to gain.
Few periods in our nation’s history have been more challenging or difficult than the one we’re in now.
A once-in-a-century virus silently stalks the country.
It’s taken as many lives in one year as America lost in all of World War II.
Millions of jobs have been lost.
Hundreds of thousands of businesses closed.
A cry for racial justice some 400 years in the making moves us. The dream of justice for all will be deferred no longer.
A cry for survival comes from the planet itself. A cry that can’t be any more desperate or any more clear.
And now, a rise in political extremism, white supremacy, domestic terrorism that we must confront and we will defeat.
To overcome these challenges – to restore the soul and to secure the future of America – requires more than words.
It requires that most elusive of things in a democracy:
Unity.
Unity.
In another January in Washington, on New Year’s Day 1863, Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
When he put pen to paper, the President said, “If my name ever goes down into history it will be for this act and my whole soul is in it.”
My whole soul is in it.
Today, on this January day, my whole soul is in this:
Bringing America together.
Uniting our people.
And uniting our nation.
I ask every American to join me in this cause.
Uniting to fight the common foes we face:
Anger, resentment, hatred.
Extremism, lawlessness, violence.
Disease, joblessness, hopelessness.
With unity we can do great things. Important things.
We can right wrongs.
We can put people to work in good jobs.
We can teach our children in safe schools.
We can overcome this deadly virus.
We can reward work, rebuild the middle class, and make health care
secure for all.
We can deliver racial justice.
We can make America, once again, the leading force for good in the world.
I know speaking of unity can sound to some like a foolish fantasy.
I know the forces that divide us are deep and they are real.
But I also know they are not new.
Our history has been a constant struggle between the American ideal that we are all created equal and the harsh, ugly reality that racism, nativism, fear, and demonization have long torn us apart.
The battle is perennial.
Victory is never assured.
Through the Civil War, the Great Depression, World War, 9/11, through struggle, sacrifice, and setbacks, our “better angels” have always prevailed.
In each of these moments, enough of us came together to carry all of us forward.
And, we can do so now.
History, faith, and reason show the way, the way of unity.
We can see each other not as adversaries but as neighbors.
We can treat each other with dignity and respect.
We can join forces, stop the shouting, and lower the temperature.
For without unity, there is no peace, only bitterness and fury.
No progress, only exhausting outrage.
No nation, only a state of chaos.
This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward.
And, we must meet this moment as the United States of America.
If we do that, I guarantee you, we will not fail.
We have never, ever, ever failed in America when we have acted together.
And so today, at this time and in this place, let us start afresh.
All of us.
Let us listen to one another.
Hear one another.
See one another.
Show respect to one another.
Politics need not be a raging fire destroying everything in its path.
Every disagreement doesn’t have to be a cause for total war.
And, we must reject a culture in which facts themselves are manipulated and even manufactured.
My fellow Americans, we have to be different than this.
America has to be better than this.
And, I believe America is better than this.
Just look around.
Here we stand, in the shadow of a Capitol dome that was completed amid the Civil War, when the Union itself hung in the balance.
Yet we endured and we prevailed.
Here we stand looking out to the great Mall where Dr. King spoke of his dream.
Here we stand, where 108 years ago at another inaugural, thousands of protestors tried to block brave women from marching for the right to vote.
Today, we mark the swearing-in of the first woman in American history elected to national office – Vice President Kamala Harris.
Don’t tell me things can’t change.
Here we stand across the Potomac from Arlington National Cemetery, where heroes who gave the last full measure of devotion rest in eternal peace.
And here we stand, just days after a riotous mob thought they could use violence to silence the will of the people, to stop the work of our democracy, and to drive us from this sacred ground.
That did not happen.
It will never happen.
Not today.
Not tomorrow.
Not ever.
To all those who supported our campaign I am humbled by the faith you have placed in us.
To all those who did not support us, let me say this: Hear me out as we move forward. Take a measure of me and my heart.
And if you still disagree, so be it.
That’s democracy. That’s America. The right to dissent peaceably, within the guardrails of our Republic, is perhaps our nation’s greatest strength.
Yet hear me clearly: Disagreement must not lead to disunion.
And I pledge this to you: I will be a President for all Americans.
I will fight as hard for those who did not support me as for those who did.
Many centuries ago, Saint Augustine, a saint of my church, wrote that a people was a multitude defined by the common objects of their love.
What are the common objects we love that define us as Americans?
I think I know.
Opportunity.
Security.
Liberty.
Dignity.
Respect.
Honor.
And, yes, the truth.
Recent weeks and months have taught us a painful lesson.
There is truth and there are lies.
Lies told for power and for profit.
And each of us has a duty and responsibility, as citizens, as Americans, and especially as leaders – leaders who have pledged to honor our Constitution and protect our nation — to defend the truth and to defeat the lies.
I understand that many Americans view the future with some fear and trepidation.
I understand they worry about their jobs, about taking care of their families, about what comes next.
I get it.
But the answer is not to turn inward, to retreat into competing factions, distrusting those who don’t look like you do, or worship the way you do, or don’t get their news from the same sources you do.
We must end this uncivil war that pits red against blue, rural versus urban, conservative versus liberal.
We can do this if we open our souls instead of hardening our hearts.
If we show a little tolerance and humility.
If we’re willing to stand in the other person’s shoes just for a moment.
Because here is the thing about life: There is no accounting for what fate will deal you.
There are some days when we need a hand.
There are other days when we’re called on to lend one.
That is how we must be with one another.
And, if we are this way, our country will be stronger, more prosperous, more ready for the future.
My fellow Americans, in the work ahead of us, we will need each other.
We will need all our strength to persevere through this dark winter.
We are entering what may well be the toughest and deadliest period of the virus.
We must set aside the politics and finally face this pandemic as one nation.
I promise you this: as the Bible says weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning.
We will get through this, together
The world is watching today.
So here is my message to those beyond our borders: America has been tested and we have come out stronger for it.
We will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again.
Not to meet yesterday’s challenges, but today’s and tomorrow’s.
We will lead not merely by the example of our power but by the power of our example.
We will be a strong and trusted partner for peace, progress, and security.
We have been through so much in this nation.
And, in my first act as President, I would like to ask you to join me in a moment of silent prayer to remember all those we lost this past year to the pandemic.
To those 400,000 fellow Americans – mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, sons and daughters, friends, neighbors, and co-workers.
We will honor them by becoming the people and nation we know we can and should be.
Let us say a silent prayer for those who lost their lives, for those they left behind, and for our country.
Amen.
This is a time of testing.
We face an attack on democracy and on truth.
A raging virus.
Growing inequity.
The sting of systemic racism.
A climate in crisis.
America’s role in the world.
Any one of these would be enough to challenge us in profound ways.
But the fact is we face them all at once, presenting this nation with the gravest of responsibilities.
Now we must step up.
All of us.
It is a time for boldness, for there is so much to do.
And, this is certain.
We will be judged, you and I, for how we resolve the cascading crises of our era.
Will we rise to the occasion?
Will we master this rare and difficult hour?
Will we meet our obligations and pass along a new and better world for our children?
I believe we must and I believe we will.
And when we do, we will write the next chapter in the American story.
It’s a story that might sound something like a song that means a lot to me.
It’s called “American Anthem” and there is one verse stands out for me:
“The work and prayers
of centuries have brought us to this day
What shall be our legacy?
What will our children say?…
Let me know in my heart
When my days are through
America
America
I gave my best to you.”
Let us add our own work and prayers to the unfolding story of our nation.
If we do this then when our days are through our children and our children’s children will say of us they gave their best.
They did their duty.
They healed a broken land.
My fellow Americans, I close today where I began, with a sacred oath.
Before God and all of you I give you my word.
I will always level with you.
I will defend the Constitution.
I will defend our democracy.
I will defend America.
I will give my all in your service thinking not of power, but of possibilities.
Not of personal interest, but of the public good.
And together, we shall write an American story of hope, not fear.
Of unity, not division.
Of light, not darkness.
An American story of decency and dignity.
Of love and of healing.
Of greatness and of goodness.
May this be the story that guides us.
The story that inspires us.
The story that tells ages yet to come that we answered the call of history.
We met the moment.
That democracy and hope, truth and justice, did not die on our watch but thrived.
That our America secured liberty at home and stood once again as a beacon to the world.
That is what we owe our forebearers, one another, and generations to follow.
So, with purpose and resolve we turn to the tasks of our time.
Sustained by faith.
Driven by conviction.
And, devoted to one another and to this country we love with all our hearts.
May God bless America and may God protect our troops.
Thank you, America.


View TranscriptTranscript
My fellow Americans: Four years ago, we launched a great national effort to rebuild our country, to renew its spirit, and to restore the allegiance of this government to its citizens. In short, we embarked on a mission to make America great again — for all Americans.
As I conclude my term as the 45th President of the United States, I stand before you truly proud of what we have achieved together. We did what we came here to do — and so much more.
This week, we inaugurate a new administration and pray for its success in keeping America safe and prosperous. We extend our best wishes, and we also want them to have luck — a very important word.
I’d like to begin by thanking just a few of the amazing people who made our remarkable journey possible.
First, let me express my overwhelming gratitude for the love and support of our spectacular First Lady, Melania. Let me also share my deepest appreciation to my daughter Ivanka, my son-in-law Jared, and to Barron, Don, Eric, Tiffany, and Lara. You fill my world with light and with joy.
I also want to thank Vice President Mike Pence, his wonderful wife Karen, and the entire Pence family.
Thank you as well to my Chief of Staff, Mark Meadows; the dedicated members of the White House Staff and the Cabinet; and all the incredible people across our administration who poured out their heart and soul to fight for America.
I also want to take a moment to thank a truly exceptional group of people: the United States Secret Service. My family and I will forever be in your debt. My profound gratitude as well to everyone in the White House Military Office, the teams of Marine One and Air Force One, every member of the Armed Forces, and state and local law enforcement all across our country.
Most of all, I want to thank the American people. To serve as your President has been an honor beyond description. Thank you for this extraordinary privilege. And that’s what it is — a great privilege and a great honor.
We must never forget that while Americans will always have our disagreements, we are a nation of incredible, decent, faithful, and peace-loving citizens who all want our country to thrive and flourish and be very, very successful and good. We are a truly magnificent nation.
All Americans were horrified by the assault on our Capitol. Political violence is an attack on everything we cherish as Americans. It can never be tolerated.
Now more than ever, we must unify around our shared values and rise above the partisan rancor, and forge our common destiny.
Four years ago, I came to Washington as the only true outsider ever to win the presidency. I had not spent my career as a politician, but as a builder looking at open skylines and imagining infinite possibilities. I ran for President because I knew there were towering new summits for America just waiting to be scaled. I knew the potential for our nation was boundless as long as we put America first.
So I left behind my former life and stepped into a very difficult arena, but an arena nevertheless, with all sorts of potential if properly done. America had given me so much, and I wanted to give something back.
Together with millions of hardworking patriots across this land, we built the greatest political movement in the history of our country. We also built the greatest economy in the history of the world. It was about “America First” because we all wanted to make America great again. We restored the principle that a nation exists to serve its citizens. Our agenda was not about right or left, it wasn’t about Republican or Democrat, but about the good of a nation, and that means the whole nation.
With the support and prayers of the American people, we achieved more than anyone thought possible. Nobody thought we could even come close.
We passed the largest package of tax cuts and reforms in American history. We slashed more job-killing regulations than any administration had ever done before. We fixed our broken trade deals, withdrew from the horrible Trans-Pacific Partnership and the impossible Paris Climate Accord, renegotiated the one-sided South Korea deal, and we replaced NAFTA with the groundbreaking USMCA — that’s Mexico and Canada — a deal that’s worked out very, very well.
Also, and very importantly, we imposed historic and monumental tariffs on China; made a great new deal with China. But before the ink was even dry, we and the whole world got hit with the China virus. Our trade relationship was rapidly changing, billions and billions of dollars were pouring into the U.S., but the virus forced us to go in a different direction.
The whole world suffered, but America outperformed other countries economically because of our incredible economy and the economy that we built. Without the foundations and footings, it wouldn’t have worked out this way. We wouldn’t have some of the best numbers we’ve ever had.
We also unlocked our energy resources and became the world’s number-one producer of oil and natural gas by far. Powered by these policies, we built the greatest economy in the history of the world. We reignited America’s job creation and achieved record-low unemployment for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, women — almost everyone.
Incomes soared, wages boomed, the American Dream was restored, and millions were lifted from poverty in just a few short years. It was a miracle. The stock market set one record after another, with 148 stock market highs during this short period of time, and boosted the retirements and pensions of hardworking citizens all across our nation. 401(k)s are at a level they’ve never been at before. We’ve never seen numbers like we’ve seen, and that’s before the pandemic and after the pandemic.
We rebuilt the American manufacturing base, opened up thousands of new factories, and brought back the beautiful phrase: “Made in the USA.”
To make life better for working families, we doubled the child tax credit and signed the largest-ever expansion of funding for childcare and development. We joined with the private sector to secure commitments to train more than 16 million American workers for the jobs of tomorrow.
When our nation was hit with the terrible pandemic, we produced not one, but two vaccines with record-breaking speed, and more will quickly follow. They said it couldn’t be done but we did it. They call it a “medical miracle,” and that’s what they’re calling it right now: a “medical miracle.”
Another administration would have taken 3, 4, 5, maybe even up to 10 years to develop a vaccine. We did in nine months.
We grieve for every life lost, and we pledge in their memory to wipe out this horrible pandemic once and for all.
When the virus took its brutal toll on the world’s economy, we launched the fastest economic recovery our country has ever seen. We passed nearly $4 trillion in economic relief, saved or supported over 50 million jobs, and slashed the unemployment rate in half. These are numbers that our country has never seen before.
We created choice and transparency in healthcare, stood up to big pharma in so many ways, but especially in our effort to get favored-nations clauses added, which will give us the lowest prescription drug prices anywhere in the world.
We passed VA Choice, VA Accountability, Right to Try, and landmark criminal justice reform.
We confirmed three new justices of the United States Supreme Court. We appointed nearly 300 federal judges to interpret our Constitution as written.
For years, the American people pleaded with Washington to finally secure the nation’s borders. I am pleased to say we answered that plea and achieved the most secure border in U.S. history. We have given our brave border agents and heroic ICE officers the tools they need to do their jobs better than they have ever done before, and to enforce our laws and keep America safe.
We proudly leave the next administration with the strongest and most robust border security measures ever put into place. This includes historic agreements with Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, along with more than 450 miles of powerful new wall.
We restored American strength at home and American leadership abroad. The world respects us again. Please don’t lose that respect.
We reclaimed our sovereignty by standing up for America at the United Nations and withdrawing from the one-sided global deals that never served our interests. And NATO countries are now paying hundreds of billions of dollars more than when I arrived just a few years ago. It was very unfair. We were paying the cost for the world. Now the world is helping us.
And perhaps most importantly of all, with nearly $3 trillion, we fully rebuilt the American military — all made in the USA. We launched the first new branch of the United States Armed Forces in 75 years: the Space Force. And last spring, I stood at Kennedy Space Center in Florida and watched as American astronauts returned to space on American rockets for the first time in many, many years.
We revitalized our alliances and rallied the nations of the world to stand up to China like never before.
We obliterated the ISIS caliphate and ended the wretched life of its founder and leader, al Baghdadi. We stood up to the oppressive Iranian regime and killed the world’s top terrorist, Iranian butcher Qasem Soleimani.
We recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and recognized Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights.
As a result of our bold diplomacy and principled realism, we achieved a series of historic peace deals in the Middle East. Nobody believed it could happen. The Abraham Accords opened the doors to a future of peace and harmony, not violence and bloodshed. It is the dawn of a new Middle East, and we are bringing our soldiers home.
I am especially proud to be the first President in decades who has started no new wars.
Above all, we have reasserted the sacred idea that, in America, the government answers to the people. Our guiding light, our North Star, our unwavering conviction has been that we are here to serve the noble everyday citizens of America. Our allegiance is not to the special interests, corporations, or global entities; it’s to our children, our citizens, and to our nation itself.
As President, my top priority, my constant concern, has always been the best interests of American workers and American families. I did not seek the easiest course; by far, it was actually the most difficult. I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism. I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do. Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus.
This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: Together, we put the American people back in charge of our country. We restored self-government. We restored the idea that in America no one is forgotten, because everyone matters and everyone has a voice. We fought for the principle that every citizen is entitled to equal dignity, equal treatment, and equal rights because we are all made equal by God. Everyone is entitled to be treated with respect, to have their voice heard, and to have their government listen. You are loyal to your country, and my administration was always loyal to you.
We worked to build a country in which every citizen could find a great job and support their wonderful families. We fought for the communities where every American could be safe and schools where every child could learn. We promoted a culture where our laws would be upheld, our heroes honored, our history preserved, and law-abiding citizens are never taken for granted. Americans should take tremendous satisfaction in all that we have achieved together. It’s incredible.
Now, as I leave the White House, I have been reflecting on the dangers that threaten the priceless inheritance we all share. As the world’s most powerful nation, America faces constant threats and challenges from abroad. But the greatest danger we face is a loss of confidence in ourselves, a loss of confidence in our national greatness. A nation is only as strong as its spirit. We are only as dynamic as our pride. We are only as vibrant as the faith that beats in the hearts of our people.
No nation can long thrive that loses faith in its own values, history, and heroes, for these are the very sources of our unity and our vitality.
What has always allowed America to prevail and triumph over the great challenges of the past has been an unyielding and unashamed conviction in the nobility of our country and its unique purpose in history. We must never lose this conviction. We must never forsake our belief in America.
The key to national greatness lies in sustaining and instilling our shared national identity. That means focusing on what we have in common: the heritage that we all share.
At the center of this heritage is also a robust belief in free expression, free speech, and open debate. Only if we forget who we are, and how we got here, could we ever allow political censorship and blacklisting to take place in America. It’s not even thinkable. Shutting down free and open debate violates our core values and most enduring traditions.
In America, we don’t insist on absolute conformity or enforce rigid orthodoxies and punitive speech codes. We just don’t do that. America is not a timid nation of tame souls who need to be sheltered and protected from those with whom we disagree. That’s not who we are. It will never be who we are.
For nearly 250 years, in the face of every challenge, Americans have always summoned our unmatched courage, confidence, and fierce independence. These are the miraculous traits that once led millions of everyday citizens to set out across a wild continent and carve out a new life in the great West. It was the same profound love of our God-given freedom that willed our soldiers into battle and our astronauts into space.
As I think back on the past four years, one image rises in my mind above all others. Whenever I traveled all along the motorcade route, there were thousands and thousands of people. They came out with their families so that they could stand as we passed, and proudly wave our great American flag. It never failed to deeply move me. I knew that they did not just come out to show their support of me; they came out to show me their support and love for our country.
This is a republic of proud citizens who are united by our common conviction that America is the greatest nation in all of history. We are, and must always be, a land of hope, of light, and of glory to all the world. This is the precious inheritance that we must safeguard at every single turn.
For the past four years, I have worked to do just that. From a great hall of Muslim leaders in Riyadh to a great square of Polish people in Warsaw; from the floor of the Korean Assembly to the podium at the United Nations General Assembly; and from the Forbidden City in Beijing to the shadow of Mount Rushmore, I fought for you, I fought for your family, I fought for our country. Above all, I fought for America and all it stands for — and that is safe, strong, proud, and free.
Now, as I prepare to hand power over to a new administration at noon on Wednesday, I want you to know that the movement we started is only just beginning. There’s never been anything like it. The belief that a nation must serve its citizens will not dwindle but instead only grow stronger by the day.
As long as the American people hold in their hearts deep and devoted love of country, then there is nothing that this nation cannot achieve. Our communities will flourish. Our people will be prosperous. Our traditions will be cherished. Our faith will be strong. And our future will be brighter than ever before.
I go from this majestic place with a loyal and joyful heart, an optimistic spirit, and a supreme confidence that for our country and for our children, the best is yet to come.
Thank you, and farewell. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.


View Transcriptthank you, thank you, thank you. please, if you have a seat, be seated. (laughter.) if you don’t, come up on stage. thank you very much. it’s a great honor to be here. mr. president, they tell me you’re over there somewhere. there you are. thank you, mr. president. “be not afraid.” they were the first words at the first public address of the first polish pope after his election on october of 1978. they were words that would come to define pope john paul ii. words that would change the world. john paul brought the message here to warsaw in his first trip back home as pope in june of 1979. it was a message about the power—the power of faith, the power of resilience, and the power of the people. in the face of a cruel and brutal system of government, it was a message that helped end the soviet repression in the central land and eastern europe 30 years ago. it was a message that will overcome the cruelty and brutality of this unjust war. when pope john paul brought that message in 1979, the soviet union ruled with an iron fist behind an iron curtain. then a year later, the solidarity movement took hold in poland. and while i know he couldn’t be here tonight, we’re all grateful in america and around the world for lech wałęsa. (applause.) it reminds me of that phrase of philosopher kierkegaard: “[f]aith sees best in the dark.” and there were dark moments. ten years later, the soviet union collapsed, and poland and central and eastern europe would soon be free. nothing about that battle for freedom was simple or easy. it was a long, painful slog fought over not days and months, but years and decades. but we emerged anew in the great battle for freedom: a battle between democracy and autocracy, between liberty and repression, between a rules-based order and one governed by brute force. in this battle, we need to be clear-eyed. this battle will not be won in days or months either. we need to steel ourselves for the long fight ahead. mr. president, mr. prime minister, mr. mayor, members of the parliament, distinguished guests, and the people of poland, and i suspect some people of ukraine that are here: we’re—(applause)—we are gathered here at the royal castle in this city that holds a sacred place in the history of not only of europe, but humankind’s unending search for freedom. for generations, warsaw has stood where liberty has been challenged and liberty has prevailed. in fact, it was here in warsaw when a young refugee, who fled her home country from czechoslovakia was under soviet domination, came back to speak and stand in solidarity with dissidents. her name was madeleine korbel albright. she became—(applause)—one of the most ardent supporters of democracy in the world. she was a friend with whom i served. america’s first woman secretary of state. she passed away three days ago. she fought her whole life for essential democratic principles. and now, in the perennial struggle for democracy and freedom, ukraine and its people are on the frontlines fighting to save their nation. and their brave resistance is part of a larger fight for an essential democratic principles that unite all free people: the rule of law; free and fair elections; the freedom to speak, to write, and to assemble; the freedom to worship as one chooses; freedom of the press. these principles are essential in a free society. (applause.) but they have always—they have always been under siege. they’ve always been embattled. every generation has had to defeat democracy’s mortal foes. that’s the way of the world—for the world is imperfect, as we know. where the appetites and ambitions of a few forever seek to dominate the lives and liberties of many. my message to the people of ukraine is the message i delivered today to ukraine’s foreign minister and defense minister, who i believe are here tonight: we stand with you. period. today’s fighting in kyiv and mariupol and kharkiv are the latest battle in a long struggle: hungary, 1956; poland, 1956 then again 1981; czechoslovakia, 1968. soviet tanks crushed democratic uprisings, but the resistance continued until finally, in 1989, the berlin wall and all of the walls of soviet domination—they fell. they fell. and the people prevailed. but the battle for democracy could not conclude and did not conclude with the end of the cold war. over the last 30 years, the forces of autocracy have revived all across the globe. its hallmarks are familiar ones: contempt for the rule of law, contempt for democratic freedom, contempt for the truth itself. today, russia has strangled democracy—has sought to do so elsewhere, not only in its homeland. under false claims of ethnic solidarity, it has invalidated [invaded] neighboring nations. putin has the gall to say he’s “de-nazifying” ukraine. it’s a lie. it’s just cynical. he knows that. and it’s also obscene. president zelenskyy was democratically elected. he’s jewish. his father’s family was wiped out in the nazi holocaust. and putin has the audacity, like all autocrats before him, to believe that might will make right. in my own country, a former president named abraham lincoln voiced the opposing spirit to save our union in the midst of a civil war. he said, “let us have faith that right makes might.” “right makes might.” today, let us now have that faith again. let us resolve to put the strength of democracies into action to thwart the denigns [sic] of our—the designs of autocracy. let us remember that the test of this moment is the test of all time. the kremlin wants to portray nato enlargement as an imperial project aimed at destabilizing russia. nothing is further from the truth. nato is a defensive alliance. it has never sought the demise of russia. in the lead-up to the current crisis, the united states and nato worked for months to engage russia to avert a war. i met with him in person and talked to him many times on the phone. time and again, we offered real diplomacy and concrete proposals to strengthen european security, enhance transparency, and build confidence on all sides. but putin and russia met each of the proposals with disinterest in any negotiation, with lies and ultimatums. russia was bent on violence from the start. i know not all of you believed me and us when we kept saying, “they are going to cross the border. they are going to attack.” repeatedly, he asserted, “we have no interest in war.” guaranteed he would not move. repeatedly saying he would not invade ukraine. repeatedly saying russian troops along the border were there for “training”—all 180,000 of them. there is simply no justification or provocation for russia’s choice of war. it’s an example of one of the oldest of human impulses: using brute force and disinformation to satisfy a craving for absolute power and control. it’s nothing less than a direct challenge to the rule-based international order established since the end of world war two. and it threatens to return to decades of war that ravaged europe before the international rule-based order was put in place. we cannot go back to that. we cannot. the gravity of the threat is why the response of the west has been so swift and so powerful and so unified, unprecedented, and overwhelming. swift and punishing costs are the only things that are going to get russia to change its course. within days of its invasion, the west had moved jointly with sanctions to damage russia’s economy. russia’s central bank is now blocked from the global financial systems, denying kremlin’s access to the war fund it stashed around the globe. we’ve aimed at the heart of russia’s economy by stopping the imports of russian energy to the united states. to date, the united states has sanctioned 140 russian oligarchs and their family members, seizing their ill-begotten gains: their yachts, their luxury apartments, their mansions. we’ve sanctioned more than 400 russian government officials, including key architects of this war. these officials and oligarchs have reaped enormous benefit from the corruption connected to the kremlin, and now they have to share in the pain. the private sector is acting as well. over 400 private multinational companies have pulled out of doing business in russia—left russia completely—from oil companies to mcdonald’s. as a result of these unprecedented sanctions, the ruble almost is immediately reduced to rubble. the russian economy—(applause)—that’s true, by the way. it takes about 200 rubles to equal one dollar. the economy is on track to be cut in half in the coming years. it was ranked—russia’s economy was ranked the 11th biggest economy in the world before this evasion [sic]—invasion. it will soon not even rank among the top 20 in the world. taken together, these economic sanctions are a new kind of economic statecraft with the power to inflict damage that rivals military might. these international sanctions are sapping russian strength, its ability to replenish its military, and its ability—its ability to project power. and it is putin—it is vladimir putin who is to blame, period. at the same time, alongside these economic sanctions, the western world has come together to provide for the people of ukraine with incredible levels of military, economic, and humanitarian assistance. in the years before the invasion, we, america, had sent over $650 million, before they crossed the border, in weapons to ukraine, including anti-air and anti-armor equipment. since the invasion, america has committed another $1.35 billion in weapons and ammunition. and thanks to the courage and bravery of the ukrainian people—(applause)—the equipment we’ve sent and our colleagues have sent have been used to devastating effect to defend ukrainian land and airspace. our allies and partners have stepped up as well. but as i’ve made clear: american forces are in europe—not in europe to engage in conflict with russian forces. american forces are here to defend nato allies. yesterday, i met with the troops that are serving alongside our polish allies to bolster nato’s frontline defenses. the reason we wanted to make clear is their movement on ukraine: don’t even think about moving on one single inch of nato territory. we have a sacred obligation—(applause)—we have a sacred obligation under article 5 to defend each and every inch of nato territory with the full force of our collective power. and earlier today, i visited your national stadium, where thousands of ukrainian refugees are now trying to answer the toughest questions a human can ask: “my god, what’s going to happen to me? what’s going to happen to my family?” i saw tears in many of the mothers’ eyes as i embraced them; their young children—their young children not sure whether to smile or cry. one little girl said, “mr. president”—she spoke a little english—“is my brother and my daddy—are they going to be okay? will i see them again?” without their husbands, their fathers, in many cases, their brothers or sisters who stayed back to fight for their country. i didn’t have to speak the language or understand the language to feel the emotion in their eyes, the way they gripped my hand, and little kids hung on to my leg, praying with a desperate hope that all this is temporary; apprehension that they may be perhaps forever away from their homes, almost with debilitating sadness that this is happening all over again. but i was also struck by the generosity of the people of warsaw—for that matter, all the polish people—for the depths of their compassion, their willingness to reach out—(applause)—opening their hearts. i was saying to the mayor they’re preparing to open their hearts and their homes simply to help. i also want to thank my friend, the great american chef, josé andrés, and his team who helped feeling [sic] those—(applause)—feeding those who are yearning to be free. but helping these refugees is not something poland or any other nation should carry alone. all the world democracies have a responsibility to help. all of them. and the people of ukraine can count on the united states to meet its responsibility. i’ve announced, two days ago, we will welcome 100,000 ukrainian refugees. we already have 8,000 a week coming to the united states of other nat-—nationalities. we’ll provide nearly $300 million of humanitarian assistance, providing tens of thousands of tons of food, water, medicine, and other basic supplies. in brussels, i announced the united states is prepared to provide more than $1 billion, in addition, in humanitarian aid. the world food programme told us that despite significant obstacles, at least some relief is getting to major cities in ukraine, but not metropol [sic]—no, excuse me, mar-—not mariupol, because russian forces are blocking relief supplies. but we’ll not cease our efforts to get humanitarian relief wherever it is needed in ukraine and for the people who’ve made it out of ukraine. notwithstanding the brutality of vladimir putin, let there be no doubt that this war has already been a strategic failure for russia already. having lost children myself—i know that’s no solace to the people who’ve lost family. but he, putin, thought ukrainians would roll over and not fight. not much of a student of history. instead, russian forces have met their match with brave and stiff ukrainian resistance. rather than breaking ukrainian resolve, russia’s brutal tactics have strengthened the resolve. rather than driving nato apart, the west is now stronger and more united than it has ever been. russia wanted less of a nato presence on its border, but now he has [we have] a stronger presence, a larger presence, with over a hundred thousand american troops here, along with all the other members of nato. in fact—(applause)—russia has managed to cause something i’m sure he never intended: the democracies of the world are revitalized with purpose and unity found in months that we’d once taken years to accomplish. it’s not only russia’s actions in ukraine that are reminding us of democracy’s blessing. it’s our own country—his own country, the kremlin, is jailing protestors. two hundred thousand people have allegedly already left. there’s a brain drain—leaving russia. shutting down independent news. state media is all propaganda, blocking the image of civilian targets, mass graves, starvation tactics of the russian forces in ukraine. is it any wonder, as i said, that 200,000 russians have all left their country in one month? a remarkable brain drain in such a short period of time, which brings me to my message to the russian people: i’ve worked with russian leaders for decades. i sat across the negotiating table going all the way back to soviet premier alexei kosygin to talk arms control at the height of the cold war. i’ve always spoken directly and honestly to you, the russian people. let me say this, if you’re able to listen: you, the russian people, are not our enemy. i refuse to believe that you welcome the killing of innocent children and grandparents or that you accept hospitals, schools, maternity wards that, for god’s sake, are being pummeled with russian missiles and bombs; or cities being surrounded so that civilians cannot flee; supplies cut off and attempting to starve ukrainians into submission. millions of families are being driven from their homes, including half of all ukraine’s children. these are not the actions of a great nation. of all people, you, the russian people, as well as all people across europe, still have the memory of being in a similar situation in the late thirties and forties—the situation of world war two—still fresh in the minds of many grandparents in the region. what—whatever your generation experienced—whether it experienced the siege of leningrad or heard about it from your parents and grandparents—train stations overflowing with terrified families fleeing their homes; nights sheltering in basements and cellars; mornings sitting through the rubble in your homes—these are not memories of the past. not anymore. because it’s exactly what the russian army is doing in ukraine right now. march 26, 2022. just days before—we’re at the twenty-fir-—you were a 21st century nation with hopes and dreams that people all over the world have for themselves and their family. now, vladimir putin’s aggression have cut you, the russian people, off from the rest of the world, and it’s taking russia back to the 19th century. this is not who you are. this is not the future reserve—you deserve for your families and your children. i’m telling you the truth: this war is not worthy of you, the russian people. putin can and must end this war. the american people stand with you and the brave citizens of ukraine who want peace. and my message to the rest of europe: this new battle for freedom has already made a few things crystal clear. first, europe must end its dependence on russian fossil fuels. and we, the united states, will help. that’s why just yesterday, in brussels, i announced a plan with the president of the european commission to get europe through the immediate energy crisis. over the long term, as a matter of economic security and national security and for the survivability of the planet, we all need to move as quickly as possible to clean, renewable energy. and we’ll work together to help get that done so that the days of any nation being subject to the whims of a tyrant for its energy needs are over. they must end. they must end. and second, we have to fight the corruption coming from the kremlin to give the russian people a fair chance. and finally, and most urgently, we maintain absolute unity—we must—among the world’s democracies. it’s not enough to speak with rhetorical flourish, of ennobling words of democracy, of freedom, equality, and liberty. all of us, including here in poland, must do the hard work of democracy each and every day. my country as well. that’s why—(applause)—that’s why i came to europe again this week with a clear and determined message for nato, for the g7, for the european union, for all freedom-loving nations: we must commit now to be in this fight for the long haul. we must remain unified today and tomorrow and the day after and for the years and decades to come. it will not be easy. there will be costs. but it’s a price we have to pay. because the darkness that drives autocracy is ultimately no match for the flame of liberty that lights the souls of free people everywhere. time and again, history shows that it’s from the darkest moments that the greatest progress follows. and history shows this is the task of our time, the task of this generation. let’s remember: the hammer blow that brought down the berlin wall, the might that lifted the iron curtain were not the words of a single leader; it was the people of europe who, for decades, fought to free themselves. their sheer bravery opened the border between austria and hungary for the pan-european picnic. they joined hands for the baltic way. they stood for solidarity here in poland. and together, it was an unmistakable and undeniable force of the people that the soviet union could not withstand. and we’re seeing it once again today with the brave ukrainian people, showing that their power of many is greater than the will of any one dictator. so, in this hour, let the words of pope john paul burn as brightly today: “never, ever give up hope, never doubt, never tire, never become discouraged. be not afraid.” a dictator bent on rebuilding an empire will never erase a people’s love for liberty. brutality will never grind down their will to be free. ukraine will never be a victory for russia—for free people refuse to live in a world of hopelessness and darkness. we will have a different future—a brighter future rooted in democracy and principle, hope and light, of decency and dignity, of freedom and possibilities. for god’s sake, this man cannot remain in power. god bless you all. and may god defend our freedom. and may god protect our troops. thank you for your patience. thank you. thank you. thank you. well, thank you. please, if you have a seat, sit down. and i got to make one check here. (the president leaves the podium to greet audience members.) (the president returns to the podium.) i just had to make sure the two girls got ice cream when this is over. (laughter.) imagine how excited you’d be when you’re—four? five? almost five years old, coming to hear a president speak. (laughter.) my lord. in my faith, we call that purgatory. (laughter.) lauren, thank you for that gracious introduction. and in case you were wondering, i—in delaware—we’re a small state—we have the eighth-largest black population in america, and we have one of the most talented members of congress. and so if i didn’t walk around and pay my tribute to lisa blunt rochester my congresswoman—(applause)—immediately, that was — how are you, rev? good to see you. we’ve got a distinguished group of people here, and i want to thank lauren for sharing the powerful story and for helping the country understand what’s happening here. and to all of the descendants here today, and to the community and civil rights leaders, and members of the congressional black caucus that are here: thank you for making sure we all remember and we never forget. you know, there’s a verse in first corinthians that says, “for now, we see in a mirror dimly, but then, face to face, now i know in part, then i shall know fully.” it is—i just toured the hall of survivors here in greenwood cultural center, and i want to thank the incredible staff for hosting us here. and—(applause)—i mean that sincerely. thank you. and if i didn’t say what my father would insist on, please excuse my back. (laughter.) i apologize. but the tour—in the tour, i met mother randle, who’s only 56 [107] years old. (laughter.) god love her. and mother fletcher, who’s 67 [106] years old. (laughter.) and her brother—her brother, van ellis, who’s 100 years old. (laughter.) and he looks like he’s 60. thank you for spending so much time with me. i really mean it. it was a great honor. a genuine honor. you are the three known remaining survivors of a story seen in the mirror dimly. but no longer. now your story will be known in full view. the events we speak of today took place 100 years ago. and yet, i’m the first president in 100 years ever to come to tulsa—(applause)—i say that not as a compliment about me, but to think about it—a hundred years, and the first president to be here during that entire time, and in this place, in this ground, to acknowledge the truth of what took place here. for much too long, the history of what took place here was told in silence, cloaked in darkness. but just because history is silent, it doesn’t mean that it did not take place. and while darkness can hide much, it erases nothing. it erases nothing. some injustices are so heinous, so horrific, so grievous they can’t be buried, no matter how hard people try. and so it is here. only—only with truth can come healing and justice and repair. only with truth, facing it. but that isn’t enough. first, we have to see, hear, and give respect to mother randle, mother fletcher, and mr. van ellis. (applause.) to all those lost so many years ago, to all the descendants of those who suffered, to this community—that’s why we’re here: to shine a light, to make sure america knows the story in full. may 1921: formerly enslaved black people and their descendants are here in tulsa—a boom town of oil and opportunity in a new frontier. on the north side, across the rail tracks that divided the city already segregated by law, they built something of their own, worthy—worthy of their talent and their ambition: greenwood—a community, a way of life. black doctors and lawyers, pastors, teachers; running hospitals, law practices, libraries, churches, schools. black veterans, like a man i had the privilege to giving a command coin to, who fought—volunteered and fought, and came home and still faced such prejudice. (applause.) veterans had been back a few years helping after winning the first world war, building a new life back home with pride and confidence, who were a mom-and—they were, at the time—mom-and-plack [sic]—mom-and-pop black diners, grocery stores, barber shops, tailors—the things that make up a community. at the dreamland theatre, a young black couple, holding hands, falling in love. friends gathered at music clubs and pool halls; at the monroe family roller-skating rink. visitors staying in hotels, like the stradford. all around, black pride shared by the professional class and the working class who lived together, side by side, for blocks on end. mother randle was just six years old—six years old—living with her grandmom. she said she was lucky to have a home and toys, and fortunate to live without fear. mother fletcher was seven years old, the second of seven children. the youngest, being mr. van ellis, was just a few months old. the children of former sharecroppers, when they went to bed at night in greenwood, mother fletcher says they fell asleep rich in terms of the wealth—not real wealth, but a different wealth—a wealth in culture and community and heritage. (applause.) but one night—one night changed everything. everything changed. while greenwood was a community to itself, it was not separated from the outside. it wasn’t everyone, but there was enough hate, resentment, and vengeance in the community. enough people who believed that america does not belong to everyone and not everyone is created equal—native americans, asian americans, hispanic americans, black americans. a belief enforced by law, by badge, by hood and by noose. and it speaks to that—lit the fuse. it lit it by the spark that it provided—a fuse of fury—was an innocent interaction that turned into an in-—a terrible, terrible headline allegation of a black male teenager attacking a white female teenager. a white mob of 1,000 gathered around the courthouse where the black teenager was being held, ready to do what still occurred: lynch that young man that night. but 75 black men, including black veterans, arrived to stand guard. words were exchanged. then a scuffle. then shots fired. hell was unleashed. literal hell was unleashed. through the night and into the morning, the mob terrorized greenwood. torches and guns. shooting at will. a mob tied a black man by the waist to the back of their truck with his head banging along the pavement as they drove off. a murdered black family draped over the fence of their home outside. an elderly couple, knelt by their bed, praying to god with their heart and their soul, when they were shot in the back of their heads. private planes—private planes—dropping explosives—the first and only domestic aerial assault of its kind on an american city here in tulsa. eight of greenwood’s nearly two dozen churches burned, like mt. zion—across the street, at vernon ame. mother randle said it was like war. mother fletcher says, all these years later, she still sees black bodies around. the greenwood newspaper publisher a.j. smitherton [sic]—excuse me—smitherman penned a poem of what he heard and felt that night. and here’s the poem. he said, “kill them, burn them, set the pace… teach them how to keep their place. reign of murder, theft, and plunder was the order of the night.” that’s what he remembered in the poem that he wrote. one hundred years ago at this hour, on this first day of june, smoke darkened the tulsa sky, rising from 35 blocks of greenwood that were left in ash and ember, razed and in rubble. less than 24 hours—in less than 24 hours, 1,100 black homes and businesses were lost. insurance companies—they had insurance, many of them—rejected claims of damage. ten thousand people were left destitute and homeless, placed in internment camps. as i was told today, they were told, “don’t you mention you were ever in a camp or we’ll come and get you.” that’s what survivors told me. yet no one—no arrests of the mob were made. none. no proper accounting of the dead. the death toll records by local officials said there were 36 people. that’s all. thirty-six people. but based on studies, records, and accounts, the likelihood—the likely number is much more, in the multiple of hundreds. untold bodies dumped into mass graves. families who, at the time, waited for hours and days to know the fate of their loved ones are now descendants who have gone 100 years without closure. but, you know, as we speak, the process—the process of exhuming the unmarked graves has started. and at this moment, i’d like to pause for a moment of silence for the fathers, the mothers, the sisters, sons, and daughters, friends of god and greenwood. they deserve dignity, and they deserve our respect. may their souls rest in peace. [pause for a moment of silence.] my fellow americans, this was not a riot. this was a massacre—(applause)—among the worst in our history, but not the only one. and for too long, forgotten by our history. as soon as it happened, there was a clear effort to erase it from our memory—our collective memories—from the news and everyday conversations. for a long time, schools in tulsa didn’t even teach it, let alone schools elsewhere. and most people didn’t realize that, a century ago, a second ku klux klan had been founded—the second ku klux klan had been founded. a friend of mine, jon meacham—i had written—when i said i was running to restore the soul of america, he wrote a book called “the soul of america”—not because of what i said. and there’s a picture about page 160 in his book, showing over 30,000 ku klux klan members in full regalia, reverend—pointed hats, the robes—marching down pennsylvania avenue in washington, d.c. jesse, you know all about this. washin-—washington, d.c. if my memory is correct, there were 37 members of the house of representatives who were open members of the klan. there were five, if i’m not mistaken—it could have been seven; i think it was five—members of the united states senate—open members of the klan. multiple governors who were open members of the klan. most people didn’t realize that, a century ago, the klan was founded just six years before the horrific destruction here in tulsa. and one of the reasons why it was founded was because of guys like me, who were catholic. it wasn’t about african americans, then; it was about making sure that all those polish and irish and italian and eastern european catholics who came to the united states after world war one would not pollute christianity. the flames from those burning crosses torched every region—region of the country. millions of white americans belonged to the klan, and they weren’t even embarrassed by it; they were proud of it. and that hate became embedded systematically and systemically in our laws and our culture. we do ourselves no favors by pretending none of this ever happened or that it doesn’t impact us today, because it does still impact us today. we can’t just choose to learn what we want to know and not what we should know. (applause.) we should know the good, the bad, everything. that’s what great nations do: they come to terms with their dark sides. and we’re a great nation. the only way to build a common ground is to truly repair and to rebuild. i come here to help fill the silence, because in silence, wounds deepen. (applause.) and only—as painful as it is, only in remembrance do wounds heal. we just have to choose to remember. we memorialize what happened here in tulsa so it can be –so it can’t be erased. we know here, in this hallowed place, we simply can’t bury pain and trauma forever. and at some point, there will be a reckoning, an inflection point, like we’re facing right now as a nation. what many people hadn’t seen before or ha-—or simply refused to see cannot be ignored any longer. you see it in so many places. and there’s greater recognition that, for too long, we’ve allowed a narrowed, cramped view of the promise of this nation to fester—the view that america is a zero-sum game where there is only one winner. “if you succeed, i fail. if you get ahead, i fall behind. if you get a job, i lose mine.” and maybe worst of all, “if i hold you down, i lift myself up,” instead of “if you do well, we all do well.” (applause.) we see that in greenwood. this story isn’t about the loss of life, but a loss of living, of wealth and prosterity [prosperity] and possibilities that still reverberates today. mother fletcher talks about how she was only able to attend school until the fourth grade and eventually found work in the shipyards, as a domestic worker. mr. van ellis has shared how, even after enlisting and serving in world war two, he still came home to struggle with a segregated america. imagine all those hotels and dinners [diners] and mom-and-pop shops that could been—have been passed down this past hundred years. imagine what could have been done for black families in greenwood: financial security and generational wealth. if you come from backgrounds like my—my family—a working-class, middle-class family—the only way we were ever able to generate any wealth was in equity in our homes. imagine what they contributed then and what they could’ve contributed all these years. imagine a thriving greenwood in north tulsa for the last hundred years, what that would’ve meant for all of tulsa, including the white community. while the people of greenwood rebuilt again in the years after the massacre, it didn’t last. eventually neighborhoods were redlined on maps, locking black tulsa out of homeownerships. (applause.) a highway was built right through the heart of the community. lisa, i was talking about our west side—what 95 did to it after we were occupied by the military, after dr. king was murdered. the community—cutting off black families and businesses from jobs and opportunity. chronic underinvestment from state and federal governments denied greenwood even just a chance at rebuilding. (applause.) we must find the courage to change the things we know we can change. that’s what vice president harris and i are focused on, along with our entire administration, including our housing and urban development secretary, marcia fudge, who is here today. (applause.) because today, we’re announcing two expanded efforts targeted toward black wealth creation that will also help the entire community. the first is: my administration has launched an aggressive effort to combat racial discrimination in housing. that includes everything from redlining to the cruel fact that a home owned by a black family is too often appraised at a lower value than a similar home owned by a white family. (applause.) and i might add—and i need help if you have an answer to this; i can’t figure this one out, congressman horsford. but if you live in a black community and there’s another one on the other side of the highway—it’s a white community; it’s the—built by the same builder, and you have a better driving record than they guy with the same car in the white community, you’re—can pay more for your auto insurance. shockingly, the percentage of black american homeownership is lower today in america than when the fair housing act was passed more than 50 years ago. lower today. that’s wrong. and we’re committing to changing that. just imagine if instead of denying millions of americans the ability to own their own home and build generational wealth, we made it possible for them to buy a home and build equity into that—into that home and provide for their families. second, small businesses are the engines of our economy and the glue of our communities. as president, my administration oversees hundreds of billions of dollars in federal contracts for everything from refurbishing decks of aircraft carriers, to installing railings in federal buildings, to professional services. we have a thing called—i won’t go into it all because there’s not enough time now. but i’m determined to use every taxpayer’s dollar that is assigned to me to spend, going to american companies and american workers to build ameri– to build american products. and as part of that, i’m going to increase the share of the dollars the federal government spends to small, disadvantaged businesses, including black and brown small businesses. right now, it calls for 10 percent; i’m going to move that to 15 percent of every dollar spent will be spent (inaudible). (applause.) i have the authority to do that. just imagine if, instead of denying millions of entrepreneurs the ability to access capital and contracting, we made it possible to take their dreams to the marketplace to create jobs and invest in our communities. that—the data shows young black entrepreneurs are just as capable of succeeding, given the chance, as white entrepreneurs are. but they don’t have lawyers. they don’t have—they—they don’t have accountants, but they have great ideas. does anyone doubt this whole nation would be better off from the investments those people make? and i promise you, that’s why i set up the—a national small business administration that’s much broader. because they’re going to get those loans. instead of consigning millions of american children to under-resourced schools, let’s give each and every child, three and four years old, access to school—not daycare, school. (applause.) in the last 10 years, studies have been done by all the great universities. it shows that, if increased by 56 percent, the possibility of a child—no matter what background they come from; no matter what—if they start school at three years old, they have a 56 percent chance of going all through all 12 years without any trouble and being able to do well, and a chance to learn and grow and thrive in a school and throughout their lives. and let’s unlock more than—an incredible creativity and innovation that will come from the nation’s historically black colleges and universities. (applause.) i have a $5 billion program giving them the resources to invest in research centers and laboratories and high-demand fields to compete for the good-paying jobs in industries like—of the future, like cybersecurity. the reason why they don’t—their—their students are equally able to learn as well, and get the good-paying job that start at 90- and 100,000 bucks. but they don’t have—they don’t have the back—they don’t have the money to provide and build those laboratories. so, guess what? they’re going to get the money to build those laboratories. (applause.) so, instead of just talking about infrastructure, let’s get about the—about the business of actually rebuilding roads and highways, filling the sidewalks and cracks, installing streetlights and high-speed internet, creating space—space to live and work and play safely. let’s ensure access to healthcare, clean water, clean air, nearby grocery stores—stock the fresh vegetables and food that—(applause)—in fact, deal with—i mean, these are all things we can do. does anyone doubt this whole nation would be better off with these investments? the rich will be just as well off. the middle class will do better, and everybody will do better. it’s about good-paying jobs, financial stability, and being able to build some generational wealth. it’s about economic growth for our country and outcompeting the rest of the world, which is now outcompeting us. but just as fundamental as any of these investments i’ve discussed—this may be the most fundamental: the right to vote. (applause.) the right to vote. (applause.) a lot of the members of the black caucus knew john lewis better than i did, but i knew him. on his deathbed, like many, i called john, to speak to him. but all john wanted to do was talk about how i was doing. he died, i think, about 25 hours later. but you know what john said? he called the right to vote “precious,” “almost sacred.” he said, “the most powerful nonviolent tool we have in a democratic society”. this sacred right is under assault with an incredible intensity like i’ve never seen—even though i got started as a public defender and a civil rights lawyer—with an intensity and an aggressiveness that we have not seen in a long, long time. it’s simply un-american. it is not, however, sadly, unprecedented. the creed “we shall overcome” is a longtime mainstay of the civil rights movement, as jesse jackson can tell you better than anybody. the obstacle to proc-—to progress that have to be overcome are a constant challenge. we saw it in the ‘60s, but with the current assault, it’s not just an echo of a distant history. in 2020, we faced a tireless assault on the right to vote: restrictive laws, lawsuits, threats of intimidation, voter purges, and more. we resolved to overcome it all, and we did. more americans voted in the last election than any—in the midst of a pandemic—than any election in american history. (applause.) you got voters registered. you got voters to the polls. the rule of law held. democracy prevailed. we overcame. but today, let me be unequivocal: i’ve been engaged in this work my whole career, and we’re going to be ramping up our efforts to overcome again. i will have more to say about this at a later date—the truly unprecedented assault on our democracy, an effort to replace nonpartisan election administrators and to intimidate those charged with tallying and reporting the election results. but today, as for the act of voting itself, i urge voting rights groups in this country to begin to redouble their efforts now to register and educate voters. (applause.) and in june—june should be a month of action on capitol hill. i hear all the folks on tv saying, “why doesn’t biden get this done?” well, because biden only has a majority of, effectively, four votes in the house and a tie in the senate, with two members of the senate who vote more with my republican friends. but we’re not giving up. earlier this year, the house of representatives passed for the people act to protect our democracy. the senate will take it up later this month, and i’m going to fight like heck with every tool at my disposal for its passage. the house is also working on the john lewis voting rights act, which is—which is critical—(applause)—to providing new legal tools to combat the new assault on the right to vote. to signify the importance of our efforts, today i’m asking vice president harris to help these efforts and lead them, among her many other responsibilities. with her leadership and your support, we’re going to overcome again, i promise you. but it’s going to take a hell of a lot of work. (applause.) and finally, we have to—and finally, we must address what remains the stain on the soul of america. what happened in greenwood was an act of hate and domestic terrorism with a through line that exists today still. just close your eyes and remember what you saw in charlottesville four years ago on television. neo-nazis, white supremacists, the kkk coming out of those fields at night in virginia with lighted torches—the veins bulging on their—as they were screaming. remember? just close your eyes and picture what it was. well, mother fletcher said when she saw the insurrection at the capitol on january the 9th [6th], it broke her heart—a mob of violent white extremists—thugs. said it reminded her what happened here in greenwood 100 years ago. look around at the various hate crimes against asian americans and jewish americans. hate that never goes away. hate only hides. jesse, i think i mentioned this to you. i thought, after you guys pushed through, with dr. king, the voting rights act and the civil rights act—i thought we moved. but what i didn’t realize—i thought we had made enormous progress, and i was so proud to be a little part of it. but you know what, rev? i didn’t realize hate is never defeated; it only hides. it hides. and given a little bit of oxygen—just a little bit oxygen—by its leaders, it comes out of there from under the rock like it was happening again, as if it never went away. and so, folks, we can’t—we must not give hate a safe harbor. as i said in my address to the joint session of congress: according to the intelligence community, terrorism from white supremacy is the most lethal threat to the homeland today. not isis, not al qaeda—white supremacists. (applause.) that’s not me; that’s the intelligence community under both trump and under my administration. two weeks ago, i signed into law the covid-19 hate crimes act, which the house had passed and the senate. my administration will soon lay out our broader strategy to counter domestic terrorism and the violence driven by the most heinous hate crimes and other forms of vigorty [sic]—of bigotry. but i’m going to close where i started. to mother randle, mother fletcher, mr. van ellis, to the descendants, and to all survivors: thank you. thank you for giving me the honor of being able to spend some time with you earlier today. thank you for your courage. thank you for your commitment. and thank your children, and your grandchildren, and your unc-—and your nieces and your nephews. to see and learn from you is a gift—a genuine gift. dr. john hope franklin, one of america’s greatest historians—tulsa’s proud son, whose father was a greenwood survivor—said, and i quote, “whatever you do, it must be done in the spirit of goodwill and mutual respect and even love. how else can we overcome the past and be worthy of our forebearers and face the future with confidence and with hope?” on this sacred and solemn day, may we find that distinctly greenwood spirit that defines the american spirit—the spirit that gives me so much confidence and hope for the future; that helps us see, face to face; a spirit that helps us know fully who we are and who we can be as a people and as a nation. i’ve never been more optimistic about the future than i am today. i mean that. and the reason is because of this new generation of young people. they’re the best educated, they’re the least prejudiced, the most open generation in american history. and although i have no scientific basis of what i’m about to say, but those of you who are over 50—how often did you ever see—how often did you ever see advertisements on television with black and white couples? not a joke. i challenge you—find today, when you turn on the stations—sit on one station for two hours. and i don’t know how many commercials you’ll see—eight to five—two to three out of five have mixed-race couples in them. that’s not by accident. they’re selling soap, man. (laughter.) not a joke. remember ol’ pat caddell? he used to say, “you want to know what’s happening in american culture? watch advertising, because they want to sell what they have.” we have hope in folks like you, honey. i really mean it. we have hope. but we’ve got to give them support. we have got to give them the backbone to do what we know has to be done. because i doubt whether any of you would be here if you didn’t care deeply about this. you sure in the devil didn’t come to hear me speak. (laughter.) but i really mean it. i really mean it. let’s not give up, man. let’s not give up. as the old saying goes, “hope springs eternal.” i know we’ve talked a lot about famous people, but i’m—my colleagues in the senate used to kid me because i was always quoting irish poets. they think i did it because i’m irish. they think i did it because we irish—we have a little chip on our shoulder. a little bit, sometimes. that’s not why i did it; i did it because they’re the best poets in the world. (laughter.) you can smile, it’s okay. it’s true. there was a famous poet who wrote a poem called “the cure at troy”—seamus heaney. and there is a stanza in it that i think is the definition of what i think should be our call today for young people. it said, “history teaches us not to hope on this side of the grave, but then, once in a lifetime, the longed-for tidal wave of justice rises up, and hope and history rhyme.” let’s make it rhyme. thank you. thank you, thank you, thank you. (applause.) thank you. thank you, heather. thank you, thank you, thank you. (laughs.) well, thank you. heather, you thought — you’re surprised you’re standing here. (laughter.) jill was very surprised i’m standing here. (laughter.) well, heather, thank you for the introduction. and i can’t look over here because the sun is shining in my eyes, but all this other crowd over here — and thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you for all you’ve done. (applause.) look, thanks for sharing this day with us — why this day matters to you and our fellow — your fellow iron workers and your families. and you explained it well. and for all the folks at home, i know this day matters to you as well. i know you’re tired of the bickering in washington, frustrated by the negativity, and you just want us to use and focus on your needs, your concerns, and the conversations that are taking place at your kitchen table — conversation as profound as they are ordinary. how do i find work? and how do i get there? how can our small business thrive and our child succeed in school? or how do we emerge from this pandemic not just with a little bit of breathing room, but with a real fighting chance to get ahead? when we ran for president, to help — i thought maybe i could help answer some of those questions for you and the needs you have. because every time i’d ride home on amtrak, i’d go through just north of — just south of baltimore. i’d look out as it would go through a suburban neighborhood. i’d look in those — all those lights were on in the windows, nance, and i’d look and i’d wonder, “what are they talking about?” i’m serious. i swear to god. “what are they talking about sitting at that table? what are they talking about?” they’re talking about the things that i talked about at our kitchen table, jill at hers, and all of you as well. ask about, “how can we come together to be president for all americans, to make sure our democracy delivers for you, for all of you?” and i promised that we couldn’t just build back to what it was before. we literally had to build back better. you couldn’t build back — we’re the only country that’s always come out of great crises stronger than when we went in. and the world has changed, and we have to be ready. my fellow americans, today, i want you to know: we hear you, and we see you. (applause.) the bill i’m about to sign into law is proof that despite the cynics, democrats and republicans can come together and deliver results. (applause.) we can do this. we can deliver real results for real people. we see in ways that really matter each and every day, to each person out there. and we’re taking a monumental step forward to build back better as a nation. i want to thank everyone who helped make this happen: vice president harris, my cabinet members, my white house team, jill, doug, our first lady, and our — first lady and our second husband. no, i’m joking. (laughter.) these guys travel all over the country together. i’m getting worried, you know. (laughter.) and doug is one hell of a lawyer besides. and everybody from the united states senate — majority leader schumer and a group of senate democrats and republicans have established this bipartisan framework, including representatives and all the folks you heard from. senator rob portman is a really — hell of a good guy. i — i’m not hurting you, rob, because i know you’re not running again. (laughter.) that’s the only reason i say it. but you are a hell of a good guy. and the most determined woman i know: senator kyrsten sinema. congratulations, kyrsten. look, committee chair tom carper, ranking member shelley moore capito. i also want to thank minority leader mitch mcconnell for voting for this bill and talking about how useful and important it is. and from the house of representatives: speaker pelosi — (applause); steny hoyer — (applause); jim clyburn — (applause); and committee chair pete defazio. (applause.) democrats and republicans. progressives and moderates. i’d like to pause and ask all the committee chairs and ranking members of the united states senate and house that are here today — please stand. would all of you stand? come on. (applause.) all right. thank you, thank you, thank you. to state the obvious, none of this would have happened without all of you. i really mean it. and also to the governors — where are the governors? governors, stand up. come on. i want you to stand up. (applause.) red states, blue states — you all contacted me. you all said you were for this. you all stepped up. and more than 375 mayors — democrats and republicans — (applause) — from every state and district of columbia wrote me asking to get this done. you got it, kid. (laughs.) and nearly 50 of whom are here today, including republican mayor of fontana who — from calif- — from fontana — from calif- — fontana, california, mayor warren, who spoke earlier. and the county and state and tribal leaders as well — civil rights leaders, faith leaders. law — you know, this law was supported by business groups — the u.s. chamber of commerce; the national association of manufacturers; the business roundtable, representing 200 of the largest corporations in america and other top business. i want to especially thank — and i’m sure you all — as we used to say in the senate –- i’d say, “a point of personal privilege” — i want to thank organized labor –- (applause) – who understand this about jobs. you all stood up. jobs! jobs! jobs! jobs! special thanks to the afl-cio; the united auto workers; electric workers, the ibew; the iron workers — it goes on — plumbers, pipe fitters, and the building trades, steel workers, mach- — who did i leave out? (laughs.) pardon me? and my wife is a member of a union, the nea. (applause.) i’m going to get in trouble. machinists — so many more. look folks, for too long, we’ve talked about having the best economy in the world. we’ve talked about asserting american leadership around the world with the best and the safest roads, railroads, ports, airports. here in washington, we’ve heard countless speeches and promises and white papers from experts. but today, we’re finally getting this done. (applause.) so my message to the american people is this: america is moving again, and your life is going to change for the better. if you live in one of the top — if you live in one of the 10 million homes or your child attends one of the 400,000 schools or childcare centers that still has lead pipes in them, you face a clear and present danger to your child’s health and your health now. this law is going to start to replace 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines –- (applause) — so every american, every child can turn on the faucet and drink clean water. and tens of thousands of plumbers and pipefitters are going to get work done in good-paying jobs. folks, as — as we saw with remote learning, remote working during the pandemic, access to high-speed internet is essential — and access to water — as essential as access to water and electricity. this law is going to make high-speed internet affordable and available everywhere — everywhere in america — urban suburban, rural — and create jobs laying down those broadband lines. no parent — no parent — (coughs) — excuse me — no parent should have to sit in a parking lot at a fast-food restaurant again just so their child can use the internet to do their homework. that’s over. (applause.) and, folks, if i visited your town, i’m sure you’d be able to tell me and — where you hold your breath as you cross the particular bridge or where the most dangerous intersection of your town is. this law makes this the most significant investment in roads and bridges in the past 70 years. it makes the most significant investment in passenger rail in the past 50 years and in public transit ever. so, what — what that means is you’re going to be safer, and you’re going to get there faster, and we’re going to have a whole hell of a lot pollution — less pollution in the air. the bipartisan law will modernize our ports, our airports, our freight rail to make it easier for companies to get goods to market; reduce supply chain bottlenecks, as we’re experiencing now; and lower cost for you and your family. the law also builds on our resilience so that the next storm — superstorm, drought, wildfire, hurricane — can be dealt with. last year alone, the united states, as a consequence of these kind of extreme weather events, lost $99 billion in the united states alone in damage. after hurricane ida — i see the distinguished governor from louisiana is over there; i saw him stand up — i went down to see him. we went through and saw all the damage there. they had 179-mile-an-hour winds at top speed in louisiana. but then i headed on up to new york — chuck, up in your area — into queens and new jersey. more people died there than in a hurricane. more people died with the flooding. record wildfires raged and went — i went to idaho and california and saw it. more land has burned to the ground than the entire state of new jersey out west. folks –- walk the neighborhoods and look the people in the eye in these circumstances, as many of you have, and you’ll see the despair and the heartache. so many of you understand; you’re living through it. this law builds back our bridges, our water systems, our powerlines, our levees better and stronger so few americans will be flooded out of their homes or lose power in those days and weeks that comes with the storms that hit. folks, this bipartisan law, for the first time ever, creates a true national network of charging stations for electric vehicles — over 500,000 of them — (applause) — so you can charge your car here and drive all the way to california not worrying about having to find places to charge, creating thousands of jobs — thousands. it is also going to make it possible for americans to get off the sidelines and into the game of manufacturing solar panels, wind turbines, batteries to store energy and power for electric vehicles, including electric school buses, which will mean millions of children will no longer inhale the dangerous diesel fumes that come out of the buses. (applause.) for real. it’s a big deal. and it’ll reward companies for paying good wages and for buying american, sourcing their products here in america right now. it’s going to help the united states export clean energy technologies to the world, creating mil- — tens of thousands of more jobs. there’s so much more in the law, but, most of all, it does something truly historic. i ran for president believing it was time to rebuild the backbone of this nation, which i characterized as working people in the middle class — they’re the ones who built the country — and to rebuild the economy from the bottom up in the middle out. this law delivers on that long-overdue promise, in my view. it creates better jobs for millions of americans. and no one — no one earning less than $400,000 a year will pay a single penny in federal taxes because of it. (applause.) and it does not include — as we did the bipartisan infrastructure bill, it does not include a single penny in gas tax, which i rejected because people under $400,000 would be paying it. this law is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild america. it leaves no one behind. and it makes — it marks an inflection point that we face as a nation. for most of the 20th century, we led the world by a significant margin because we invested in ourselves. but somewhere along the way, we stopped investing in ourselves. we’ve risked losing our edge as a nation, and china and the rest of the world are catching up. our infrastructure used to be rated the best in the world. now, according to the world economic forum, we rank 13th in the world. well, that’s about to change. (applause.) things are going to turn around in a big way. for example, because of this law, next year will be the first year in 20 years american infrastructure investment will grow faster than china’s. we’ll once again have the best roads, bridges, ports, and airports over the next decade. and we’ll lead the world into the 21st century with modern cars and trucks and transit systems. we’re going to do this by building again and moving again. folks, too often in washington the reason we didn’t get things done is because we insisted on getting everything we want — everything. with this law, we focus on getting things done. i ran for president because the only way to move this country forward, in my view, was through compromise and consensus. that’s how the system works. that’s american democracy. and i’m going to be signing a law that is truly consequential because we made our democracy deliver for the american people. we compromised. we reached a consensus. that’s necessary. and now, our focus moves to implementing an infrastructure law that’s going to — with speed and with discipline. i have a lot of experience in doing that. when i was vice president, i was given responsibility for overseeing and implementing the recovery act, a nearly $900 billion emergency package. i’m proud to say that when we finished implementing that recovery act, it was determined that there had been less than two tenths of 1 percent waste, fraud, or abuse. and i was — it was how i learned and earned the nickname “sheriff joe” from president obama. because i made it a point, every single day for well over a year, to stay on top of how the money was being used. i spoke with over 160 mayors — two, three times sometimes. and i spoke with county executives and every governor save one — i won’t mention that; save one — (laughter) — she could see alaska from her porch, but — monitor what we’re doing, just how it was being done. and it was one of the most efficient implementations of a major program in american history. and now we owe it to the american people to do the same thing again. and to make sure every penny is spent where it’s supposed to go in a timely fashion, i’ve asked the former mayor of new orleans and former lieutenant governor of louisiana, mitch landrieu, to oversee this responsibility. (applause.) he’ll have full access to every tool the federal government has to get it done. and we have — we have the high obligation and responsibility to make sure this money is used wisely and used well. folks, i’ve been looking forward to this day for a long time like all of my colleagues here have. tomorrow, i’ll be traveling to new hampshire to visit a bridge that is structurally not safe, like thousands of bridges across america. that’s what this law is all about: keeping communities safer and more efficient. on wednesday, i’ll be in detroit to meet with the uaw workers who are building the next generation of electric vehicles. and that’s just the beginning. we’re also seeing me and the vice — you’ll be seeing me and the vice president harris, jill and doug, cabinet officials hitting the road to help you understand how this is going to transform your lives for the better. and, folks, when you see those projects start in your hometowns, i want you to feel what i feel: pride — pride in what we can do together as the united states of america. folks, you know, the same goes for my plan to build back better for the people — getting folks back to work and reducing costs of things like childcare, eldercare, housing, healthcare, prescription drugs, and meeting the moment on climate change. i’m confident that the house will pass this bill, and then we’re going to have to pass it in the senate. and it’s fully paid for. it will reduce the deficit over the long term, according to leading economists in the world. and again, no one earning less than $400,000 will pay a single penny more in federal taxes. and together — together with the infrastructure bill, millions of lives will be changed for the better. folks, let me close with this: throughout our history, we’ve emerged from crises by investing in ourselves. during and after the civil war, it’s been referenced, we built the transcontinental railroad, uniting east and west and uniting america. during the cold war, we built the interstate highway system, transforming how america lived their lives. and now, we’re emerging from the covid-19 pandemic, and we’ll build an economy for the 21st century. when i met with the president of china — who i’m going to be speaking with tonight — several years ago, he asked me — we were in china — he asked me — he said: could i define america? and i said, “absolutely.” it’s the god’s truth. i said, “absolutely. i can define it in one word: possibilities. possibilities.” there is no limit to what our people think we can do. and there is no limit to what our nation can do. and there is no one thing that i know more than this: it’s never, ever been a good bet to bet against the american people. never, never, never. (applause.) given half a chance, the american people have never, ever, ever, ever let this nation down. and it’s our job to give our people that chance. it’s our job to come together and make sure we remain a nation of possibilities. as i look out on this crowd today, i see democrats and republicans, national leaders, local leaders, all elected officials, labor leaders, business leaders, and, most of all, i see fellow americans. i see america. let’s remember this day. let’s remember we can come together. and most of all, let’s remember what we got done for the american people when we do come together. i truly believe that 50 years from now, historians are going to look back at this moment and say, “that’s the moment america began to win the competition of the 21st century.” so, with confidence, optimism, with vision and faith in each other, let’s believe in possibilities. let’s believe in one another. and let’s believe in america. god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. (applause.) now let me sign this bipartisan bill. (applause.) (the bill is signed.) (applause.) thank you, thank you, thank you. thanks, everybody. 4:21 p.m. est Transcript
Good evening, my fellow Americans. We’re facing an inflection point in history—one of those moments where the decisions we make today are going to determine the future for decades to come. That’s what I’d like to talk with you about tonight.You know, earlier this morning, I returned from Israel. They tell me I’m the first American president to travel there during a war.I met with the Prime Minister and members of his cabinet. And most movingly, I met with Israelis who had personally lived through horrific horror of the attack by Hamas on the 7th of October.More than 1,300 people slaughtered in Israel, including at least 32 American citizens. Scores of innocents—from infants to elderly grandparents, Israelis, Americans—taken hostage.As I told the families of Americans being held captive by Hamas, we’re pursuing every avenue to bring their loved ones home. As President, there is no higher priority for me than the safety of Americans held hostage.The terrorist group Hamas unleashed pure, unadulterated evil in the world. But sadly, the Jewish people know, perhaps better than anyone, that there is no limit to the depravity of people when they want to inflict pain on others.In Israel, I saw a people who are strong, determined, resilient, and also angry, in shock, and in deep, deep pain.I also spoke with President Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and reiterated that the United States remains committed to the Palestinian people’s right to dignity and to self-determination. The actions of Hamas terrorists don’t take that right away.Like so many other, I am heartbroken by the tragic loss of Palestinian life, including the explosion at a hospital in Gaza—which was not done by the Israelis.We mourn every innocent life lost. We can’t ignore the humanity of innocent Palestinians who only want to live in peace and have an opportunity.You know, the assault on Israel echoes nearly 20 months of war, tragedy, and brutality inflicted on the people of Ukraine—people that were very badly hurt since Putin launched his all-out invasion.We’ve have not forgotten the mass graves, the bodies found bearing signs of torture, rape used as a weapon by the Russians, and thousands and thousands of Ukrainian children forcibly taken into Russia, stolen from their parents. It’s sick.Hamas and Putin represent different threats, but they share this in common: They both want to completely annihilate a neighboring democracy—completely annihilate it.Hamas—its stated purpose for existing is the destruction of the State of Israel and the murder of Jewish people.Hamas does not represent the Palestinian people. Hamas uses Palestinian civilians as human shields, and innocent Palestinian families are suffering greatly because of them.Meanwhile, Putin denies Ukraine has or ever had real statehood. He claims the Soviet Union created Ukraine. And just two weeks ago, he told the world that if the United States and our allies withdraw—and if the United States withdraw, our allies will as well—military support for Ukraine, it would have, quote, “a week left to live.” But we’re not withdrawing.I know these conflicts can seem far away. And it’s natural to ask: Why does this matter to America?So let me share with you why making sure Israel and Ukraine succeed is vital for America’s national security. You know, history has taught us that when terrorists don’t pay a price for their terror, when dictators don’t pay a price for their aggression, they cause more chaos and death and more destruction. They keep going, and the cost and the threats to America and to the world keep rising.So, if we don’t stop Putin’s appetite for power and control in Ukraine, he won’t limit himself just to Ukraine. He’s—Putin has already threated to “remind”—quote, “remind” Poland that their western land was a gift from Russia.One of his top advisors, a former president of Russia, has called Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania Russia’s “Baltic provinces.” These are all NATO Allies.For 75 years, NATO has kept peace in Europe and has been the cornerstone of American security. And if Putin attacks a NATO Ally, we will defend every inch of NATO which the treaty requires and calls for.We will have something that we do not seek—make it clear: we do not seek—we do not seek to have American troops fighting in Russia or fighting against Russia.Beyond Europe, we know that our allies and, maybe most importantly, our adversaries and competitors are watching. They’re watching our response in Ukraine as well.And if we walk away and let Putin erase Ukraine’s independence, would-be aggressors around the world would be emboldened to try the same. The risk of conflict and chaos could spread in other parts of the world—in the Indo-Pacific, in the Middle East—especially in the Middle East.Iran is—is supporting Russia in Ukraine, and it’s supporting Hamas and other terrorist groups in the region. And we’ll continue to hold them accountable, I might add.The United States and our partners across the region are working to build a better future for the Middle East, one where the Middle East is more stable, better connected to its neighbors, and—through innovative projects like the India-Middle East-Europe rail corridor that I announced this year at the summit of the world’s biggest economies. More predictable markets, more employment, less rage, less grievances, less war when connected. It benefits the people—it would benefit the people of the Middle East, and it would benefit us.American leadership is what holds the world together. American alliances are what keep us, America, safe. American values are what make us a partner that other nations want to work with. To put all that at risk if we walk away from Ukraine, if we turn our backs on Israel, it’s just not worth it.That’s why, tomorrow, I’m going to send to Congress an urgent budget request to fund America’s national security needs, to support our critical partners, including Israel and Ukraine.It’s a smart investment that’s going to pay dividends for American security for generations, help us keep American troops out of harm’s way, help us build a world that is safer, more peaceful, and more prosperous for our children and grandchildren.In Israel, we must make sure that they have what they need to protect their people today and always.The security package I’m sending to Congress and asking Congress to do is an unprecedented commitment to Israel’s security that will sharpen Israel’s qualitative military edge, which we’ve committed to—the qualitative military edge.We’re going to make sure Iron Dome continues to guard the skies over Israel. We’re going to make sure other hostile actors in the region know that Israel is stronger than ever and prevent this conflict from spreading.Look, at the same time, Prime Minister Netanyahu and I discussed again yesterday the critical need for Israel to operate by the laws of war. That means protecting civilians in combat as best as they can. The people of Gaza urgently need food, water, and medicine.Yesterday, in discussions with the leaders of Israel and Egypt, I secured an agreement for the first shipment of humanitarian assistance from the United Nations to Palestinian civilians in Gaza.If Hamas does not divert or steal this shipment—these shipments, we’re going to provide an opening for sustained delivery of lifesaving humanitarian assistance for the Palestinians.And as I said in Israel: As hard as it is, we cannot give up on peace. We cannot give up on a two-state solution.Israel and Palestinians equally deserve to live in safety, dignity, and peace.You know, and here at home, we have to be honest with ourselves. In recent years, too much hate has been given too much oxygen, fueling racism, a rise in antisemitism and Islamophobia right here in America.It’s also intensified in the wake of recent events that led to the horrific threats and attacks that both shock us and break our hearts.On October 7th, terror attacks have triggered deep scars and terrible memories in the Jewish community.Today, Jewish families worried about being targeted in school, wearing symbols of their faith walking down the street, or going out about their daily lives.You know, I know many of you in the Muslim American community or the Arab American community, the Palestinian American community, and so many others are outraged and hurting, saying to yourselves, “Here we go again,” with Islamophobia and distrust we saw after 9/11.Just last week, a mother was brutally stabbed, a little boy—here in the United States—a little boy who had just turned six years old was murdered in their home outside of Chicago.His name was Wadea—Wadea—a proud American, a proud Palestinian American family.We can’t stand by and stand silent when this happens. We must, without equivocation, denounce antisemitism. We must also, without equivocation, denounce Islamophobia.And to all of you hurting—those of you who are hurting, I want you to know: I see you. You belong. And I want to say this to you: You’re all America. You’re all America.This is in a moment where there’s—you know, in moments like these, when fear and suspicion, anger and rage run hard, that we have to work harder than ever to hold on to the values that make us who we are.We’re a nation of religious freedom, freedom of expression. We all have a right to debate and disagree without fear of being targeted at schools or workplaces or in our communities.And we must renounce violence and vitriol, see each other not as enemies but as—but as fellow Americans.When I was in Israel yesterday, I said that when America experienced the hell of 9/11, we felt enraged as well. While we sought and got justice, we made mistakes. So, I cautioned the government of Israel not to be blinded by rage.And here in America, let us not forget who we are. We reject all forms—all forms of hate, whether against Muslims, Jews, or anyone. That’s what great nations do, and we are great nation.On Ukraine, I’m asking Congress to make sure we can continue to send Ukraine the weapons they need to defend themselves and their country without interruption so Ukraine can stop Putin’s brutality in Ukraine.They are succeeding.When Putin invaded Ukraine, he thought he would take Kyiv and all of Ukraine in a matter of days. Well, over a year later, Putin has failed, and he continues to fail. Kyiv still stands because of the bravery of the Ukrainian people.Ukraine has regained more than 50 percent of the territory that Russian troops once occupied, backed by a U.S.-led coalition of more than 50 countries around the world all doing its part to support Kyiv.What would happen if we walked away? We are the essential nation.Meanwhile, Putin has turned to Iran and North Korea to buy attack drones and ammunition to terrorize Ukrainian cities and people.From the outset, I have said I will not send American troops to fight in Ukraine.All Ukraine is asking for is help—for the weapons, munitions, the capacity, the capability to push invading Russian forces off their land, and the air defense systems to shoot down Russian missiles before they destroy Ukrainian cities.And let me be clear about something: We send Ukraine equipment sitting in our stockpiles. And when we use the money allocated by Congress, we use it to replenish our own stores—our own stockpiles with new equipment—equipment that defends America and is made in America: Patriot missiles for air defense batteries made in Arizona; artillery shells manufactured in 12 states across the country—in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Texas; and so much more.You know, just as in World War Two, today, patriotic American workers are building the arsenal of democracy and serving the cause of freedom.Let me close with this. Earlier this year, I boarded Air Force One for a secret flight to Poland. There, I boarded a train with blacked-out windows for a 10-hour ride each way to Kyiv to stand with the people of Ukraine ahead of the one-year anniversary of their brave fight against Putin.I’m told I was the first American [president] to enter a warzone not controlled by the United States military since President Lincoln.With me was just a small group of security personnel and a few advisors.But when I exited that train and met Zelenskyy—President Zelenskyy, I didn’t feel alone. I was bringing with me the idea of America, the promise of America to the people who are today fighting for the same things we fought for 250 years ago: freedom, independence, self-determination.And as I walked through Kyiv with President Zelenskyy, with air raid sirens sounding in the distance, I felt something I’ve always believed more strongly than ever before: America is a beacon to the world still. Still.We are, as my friend Madeleine Albright said, “the indispensable nation.”Tonight, there are innocent people all over the world who hope because of us, who believe in a better life because of us, who are desperate not be forgotten by us, and who are waiting for us.But time is of the essence.I know we have our divisions at home. We have to get past them. We can’t let petty, partisan, angry politics get in the way of our responsibilities as a great nation.We cannot and will not let terrorists like Hamas and tyrants like Putin win. I refuse to let that happen.In moments like these, we have to remind, we have to remember who we are. We are the United States of America—the United States of America. And there is nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together.My fellow Americans, thank you for your time.May God bless you all. And may God protect our troops.


View Transcriptmadam vice president, my fellow americans: to state the obvious, one year ago today, in this sacred place, democracy was attacked—simply attacked. the will of the people was under assault. the constitution—our constitution—faced the gravest of threats. outnumbered and in the face of a brutal attack, the capitol police, the dc metropolitan police department, the national guard, and other brave law enforcement officials saved the rule of law. our democracy held. we the people endured. and we the people prevailed. for the first time in our history, a president had not just lost an election, he tried to prevent the peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob breached the capitol. but they failed. they failed. and on this day of remembrance, we must make sure that such an attack never, never happens again. i’m speaking to you today from statuary hall in the united states capitol. this is where the house of representatives met for 50 years in the decades leading up to the civil war. this is—on this floor is where a young congressman of illinois, abraham lincoln, sat at desk 191. above him—above us, over that door leading into the rotunda—is a sculpture depicting clio, the muse of history. in her hands, an open book in which she records the events taking place in this chamber below. clio stood watch over this hall one year ago today, as she has for more than 200 years. she recorded what took place. the real history. the real facts. the real truth. the facts and the truth that vice president harris just shared and that you and i and the whole world saw with our own eyes. the bible tells us that we shall know the truth, and the truth shall make us free. we shall know the truth. well, here is the god’s truth about january 6th, 2021: close your eyes. go back to that day. what do you see? rioters rampaging, waving for the first time inside this capitol a confederate flag that symbolized the cause to destroy america, to rip us apart. even during the civil war, that never, ever happened. but it happened here in 2021. what else do you see? a mob breaking windows, kicking in doors, breaching the capitol. american flags on poles being used as weapons, as spears. fire extinguishers being thrown at the heads of police officers. a crowd that professes their love for law enforcement assaulted those police officers, dragged them, sprayed them, stomped on them. over 140 police officers were injured. we’ve all heard the police officers who were there that day testify to what happened. one officer called it, quote, a med-—“medieval” battle, and that he was more afraid that day than he was fighting the war in iraq. they’ve repeatedly asked since that day: how dare anyone—anyone—diminish, belittle, or deny the hell they were put through? we saw it with our own eyes. rioters menaced these halls, threatening the life of the speaker of the house, literally erecting gallows to hang the vice president of the united states of america. but what did we not see? we didn’t see a former president, who had just rallied the mob to attack—sitting in the private dining room off the oval office in the white house, watching it all on television and doing nothing for hours as police were assaulted, lives at risk, and the nation’s capital under siege. this wasn’t a group of tourists. this was an armed insurrection. they weren’t looking to uphold the will of the people. they were looking to deny the will of the people. they were looking to uphold—they weren’t looking to uphold a free and fair election. they were looking to overturn one. they weren’t looking to save the cause of america. they were looking to subvert the constitution. this isn’t about being bogged down in the past. this is about making sure the past isn’t buried. that’s the only way forward. that’s what great nations do. they don’t bury the truth, they face up to it. sounds like hyperbole, but that’s the truth: they face up to it. we are a great nation. my fellow americans, in life, there’s truth and, tragically, there are lies—lies conceived and spread for profit and power. we must be absolutely clear about what is true and what is a lie. and here is the truth: the former president of the united states of america has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election. he’s done so because he values power over principle, because he sees his own interests as more important than his country’s interests and america’s interests, and because his bruised ego matters more to him than our democracy or our constitution. he can’t accept he lost, even though that’s what 93 united states senators, his own attorney general, his own vice president, governors and state officials in every battleground state have all said: he lost. that’s what 81 million of you did as you voted for a new way forward. he has done what no president in american history—the history of this country—has ever, ever done: he refused to accept the results of an election and the will of the american people. while some courageous men and women in the republican party are standing against it, trying to uphold the principles of that party, too many others are transforming that party into something else. they seem no longer to want to be the party—the party of lincoln, eisenhower, reagan, the bushes. but whatever my other disagreements are with republicans who support the rule of law and not the rule of a single man, i will always seek to work together with them to find shared solutions where possible. because if we have a shared belief in democracy, then anything is possible—anything. and so, at this moment, we must decide: what kind of nation are we going to be? are we going to be a nation that accepts political violence as a norm? are we going to be a nation where we allow partisan election officials to overturn the legally expressed will of the people? are we going to be a nation that lives not by the light of the truth but in the shadow of lies? we cannot allow ourselves to be that kind of nation. the way forward is to recognize the truth and to live by it. the big lie being told by the former president and many republicans who fear his wrath is that the insurrection in this country actually took place on election day—november 3rd, 2020. think about that. is that what you thought? is that what you thought when you voted that day? taking part in an insurrection? is that what you thought you were doing? or did you think you were carrying out your highest duty as a citizen and voting? the former president and his supporters are trying to rewrite history. they want you to see election day as the day of insurrection and the riot that took place here on january 6th as the true expression of the will of the people. can you think of a more twisted way to look at this country—to look at america? i cannot. here’s the truth: the election of 2020 was the greatest demonstration of democracy in the history of this country. more of you voted in that election than have ever voted in all of american history. over 150 million americans went to the polls and voted that day in a pandemic—some at grea-—great risk to their lives. they should be applauded, not attacked. right now, in state after state, new laws are being written—not to protect the vote, but to deny it; not only to suppress the vote, but to subvert it; not to strengthen or protect our democracy, but because the former president lost. instead of looking at the election results from 2020 and saying they need new ideas or better ideas to win more votes, the former president and his supporters have decided the only way for them to win is to suppress your vote and subvert our elections. it’s wrong. it’s undemocratic. and frankly, it’s un-american. the second big lie being told by the former president and his supporters is that the results of the election of 2020 can’t be trusted. the truth is that no election—no election in american history has been more closely scrutinized or more carefully counted. every legal challenge questioning the results in every court in this country that could have been made was made and was rejected—often rejected by republican-appointed judges, including judges appointed by the former president himself, from state courts to the united states supreme court. recounts were undertaken in state after state. georgia—georgia counted its results three times, with one recount by hand. phony partisan audits were undertaken long after the election in several states. none changed the results. and in some of them, the irony is the margin of victory actually grew slightly. so, let’s speak plainly about what happened in 2020. even before the first ballot was cast, the former president was preemptively sowing doubt about the election results. he built his lie over months. it wasn’t based on any facts. he was just looking for an excuse—a pretext—to cover for the truth. he’s not just a former president. he’s a defeated former president—defeated by a margin of over 7 million of your votes in a full and free and fair election. there is simply zero proof the election results were inaccurate. in fact, in every venue where evidence had to be produced and an oath to tell the truth had to be taken, the former president failed to make his case. just think about this: the former president and his supporters have never been able to explain how they accept as accurate the other election results that took place on november 3rd—the elections for governor, united states senate, the house of representatives—elections in which they closed the gap in the house. they challenge none of that. the president’s name was first, then we went down the line—governors, senators, house of representatives. somehow, those results were accurate on the same ballot, but the presidential race was flawed? and on the same ballot, the same day, cast by the same voters. the only difference: the former president didn’t lose those races; he just lost the one that was his own. finally, the third big lie being told by a former president and his supporters is that the mob who sought to impose their will through violence are the nation’s true patriots. is that what you thought when you looked at the mob ransacking the capitol, destroying property, literally defecating in the hallways, rifling through desks of senators and representatives, hunting down members of congress? patriots? not in my view. to me, the true patriots were the more than 150 [million] americans who peacefully expressed their vote at the ballot box, the election workers who protected the integrity of the vote, and the heroes who defended this capitol. you can’t love your country only when you win. you can’t obey the law only when it’s convenient. you can’t be patriotic when you embrace and enable lies. those who stormed this capitol and those who instigated and incited and those who called on them to do so held a dagger at the throat of america—at american democracy. they didn’t come here out of patriotism or principle. they came here in rage—not in service of america, but rather in service of one man. those who incited the mob—the real plotters—who were desperate to deny the certification of the election and defy the will of the voters. but their plot was foiled. congressmen—democrats and republicans—stayed. senators, representatives, staff—they finished their work the constitution demanded. they honored their oath to defend the constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic. look, folks, now it’s up to all of us—to “we the people”—to stand for the rule of law, to preserve the flame of democracy, to keep the promise of america alive. that promise is at risk, targeted by the forces that value brute strength over the sanctity of democracy, fear over hope, personal gain over public good. make no mistake about it: we’re living at an inflection point in history. both at home and abroad, we’re engaged anew in a struggle between democracy and autocracy, between the aspirations of the many and the greed of the few, between the people’s right of self-determination and self-—the self-seeking autocrat. from china to russia and beyond, they’re betting that democracy’s days are numbered. they’ve actually told me democracy is too slow, too bogged down by division to succeed in today’s rapidly changing, complicated world. and they’re betting—they’re betting america will become more like them and less like us. they’re betting that america is a place for the autocrat, the dictator, the strongman. i do not believe that. that is not who we are. that is not who we have ever been. and that is not who we should ever, ever be. our founding fathers, as imperfect as they were, set in motion an experiment that changed the world—literally changed the world. here in america, the people would rule, power would be transferred peacefully—never at the tip of a spear or the barrel of a gun. and they committed to paper an idea that couldn’t live up to—they couldn’t live up to but an idea that couldn’t be constrained: yes, in america all people are created equal. we reject the view that if you succeed, i fail; if you get ahead, i fall behind; if i hold you down, i somehow lift myself up. the former president, who lies about this election, and the mob that attacked this capitol could not be further away from the core american values. they want to rule or they will ruin—ruin what our country fought for at lexington and concord; at gettysburg; at omaha beach; seneca falls; selma, alabama. what—and what we were fighting for: the right to vote, the right to govern ourselves, the right to determine our own destiny. and with rights come responsibilities: the responsibility to see each other as neighbors—maybe we disagree with that neighbor, but they’re not an adversary; the responsibility to accept defeat then get back in the arena and try again the next time to make your case; the responsibility to see that america is an idea—an idea that requires vigilant stewardship. as we stand here today—one year since january 6th, 2021—the lies that drove the anger and madness we saw in this place, they have not abated. so, we have to be firm, resolute, and unyielding in our defense of the right to vote and to have that vote counted. some have already made the ultimate sacrifice in this sacred effort. jill and i have mourned police officers in this capitol rotunda not once but twice in the wake of january 6th: once to honor officer brian sicknick, who lost his life the day after the attack, and a second time to honor officer billy evans, who lost his life defending this capitol as well. we think about the others who lost their lives and were injured and everyone living with the trauma of that day—from those defending this capitol to members of congress in both parties and their staffs, to reporters, cafeteria workers, custodial workers, and their families. don’t kid yourself: the pain and scars from that day run deep. i said it many times and it’s no more true or real than when we think about the events of january 6th: we are in a battle for the soul of america. a battle that, by the grace of god and the goodness and gracious—and greatness of this nation, we will win. believe me, i know how difficult democracy is. and i’m crystal clear about the threats america faces. but i also know that our darkest days can lead to light and hope. from the death and destruction, as the vice president referenced, in pearl harbor came the triumph over the forces of fascism. from the brutality of bloody sunday on the edmund pettus bridge came historic voting rights legislation. so, now let us step up, write the next chapter in american history where january 6th marks not the end of democracy, but the beginning of a renaissance of liberty and fair play. i did not seek this fight brought to this capitol one year ago today, but i will not shrink from it either. i will stand in this breach. i will defend this nation. and i will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of our democracy. we will make sure the will of the people is heard; that the ballot prevails, not violence; that authority in this nation will always be peacefully transferred. i believe the power of the presidency and the purpose is to unite this nation, not divide it; to lift us up, not tear us apart; to be about us—about us, not about “me.” deep in the heart of america burns a flame lit almost 250 years ago—of liberty, freedom, and equality. this is not a land of kings or dictators or autocrats. we’re a nation of laws; of order, not chaos; of peace, not violence. here in america, the people rule through the ballot, and their will prevails. so, let us remember: together, we’re one nation, under god, indivisible; that today, tomorrow, and forever, at our best, we are the united states of america. god bless you all. may god protect our troops. and may god bless those who stand watch over our democracy. speaker johnson, vice president vance, the first lady of the united states, members of the united states congress, thank you very much. and to my fellow citizens, america is back. six weeks ago, i stood beneath the dome of this capitol and proclaimed the dawn of the golden age of america. from that moment on, it has been nothing but swift and unrelenting action to usher in the greatest and most successful era in the history of our country.we have accomplished more in 43 days than most administrations accomplished in four years or eight years, and we are just getting started. thank you.i return to this chamber tonight to report that america’s momentum is back, our spirit is back, our pride is back, our confidence is back, and the american dream is surging bigger and better than ever before. the american dream is unstoppable, and our country is on the verge of a comeback, the likes of which the world has never witnessed and perhaps will never witness again. there’s never been anything like it.the presidential election of november 5th was a mandate like has not been seen in many decades. we won all seven swing states, giving us an electoral college victory of 312 votes. we won the popular vote —representative green: (inaudible.)the president: — by big numbers and won counties in our country —audience: booo —audience: usa! usa! usa!representative green: you are — you have no right to cut medicaid.audience: usa! usa! usa!the president: — and won counties in our country 2,700 to 525 on a map that reads almost completely red for republican.now, for the first time in modern history, more americans believe that our country is headed in the right direction than the wrong direction. in fact, it’s an astonishing record: 27-point swing, the most ever.likewise, small-business optimism saw its single largest one-month gain ever recorded.speaker johnson: mr. president —the president: a 41-point jump.(speaker johnson strikes the gavel.)speaker johnson: members are directed to uphold and maintain decorum in the house and to cease any further disruptions. that’s your warning.representative green: he has no mandate to cut medicaid.speaker johnson: members are engaging in willful and continuing breach of decorum, and the chair is prepared to direct the sergeant at arms to restore order to the joint session.mr. green, take your seat. take your seat, sir.representative green: he has no mandate to cut medicaid.speaker johnson: take your seat.finding that members continue to engage in willful and concerted disruption of proper decorum, the chair now directs the sergeant at arms to restore order. remove this gentleman from the chamber.representative green: shame on all of you.(members of the audience sing “na na hey hey kiss him goodbye.”)(cross-talk.)representative green: you have no mandate.speaker johnson: members are directed to uphold and maintain decorum in the house.mr. president, you can continue.the president: thank you.over the past six weeks, i have signed nearly 100 executive orders and taken more than 400 executive actions — a record — to restore common sense, safety, optimism, and wealth all across our wonderful land. the people elected me to do the job, and i’m doing it.in fact, it has been stated by many that the first month of our presidency — it’s our presidency — is the most successful in the history of our nation by many. and what makes it even more impressive is that — do you know who number two is? george washington. how about that? how about that? i don’t know about that list, but we’ll take it.within hours of taking the oath of office, i declared a national emergency on our southern border and i deployed the u.s. military and border patrol to repel the invasion of our country. and what a job they’ve done.as a result, illegal border crossings last month were, by far, the lowest ever recorded. ever. they heard my words, and they chose not to come. much easier that way.in comparison, under joe biden, the worst president in american history — there were hundreds of thousands of illegal crossings a month, and virtually all of them, including murderers, drug dealers, gang members, and people from mental institutions and insane asylums, were released into our country. who would want to do that?this is my fifth such speech to congress, and, once again, i look at the democrats in front of me, and i realize there is absolutely nothing i can say to make them happy or to make them stand or smile or applaud. nothing i can do. i could find a cure to the most devastating disease — a disease that would wipe out entire nations, or announce the answers to the greatest economy in history or the stoppage of crime to the lowest levels ever recorded, and these people sitting right here will not clap, will not stand, and certainly will not cheer for these astronomical achievements. they won’t do it no matter what.five times i’ve been up here. it’s very sad, and it just shouldn’t be this way.so, democrats sitting before me, for just this one night, why not join us in celebrating so many incredible wins for america? for the good of our nation, let’s work together and let’s truly make america great again.every day, my administration is fighting to deliver the change america needs, to bring a future that america deserves, and we’re doing it. this is a time for big dreams and bold action.upon taking office, i imposed an immediate freeze on all federal hiring, a freeze on all new federal regulations, and a freeze on all foreign aid. i terminated the ridiculous green new scam. i withdrew from the unfair paris climate accord, which was costing us trillions of dollars that other countries were not paying. i withdrew from the corrupt world health organization. and i also withdrew from the anti-american u.n. human rights council.we ended all of biden’s environmental restrictions that were making our country far less safe and totally unaffordable. and importantly, we ended the last administration’s insane electric vehicle mandate, saving our autoworkers and companies from economic destruction.to unshackle our economy, i have directed that for every 1 new regulation, 10 old regulations must be eliminated, just like i did in my very successful first term. and in that first term, we set records on ending unnecessary rules and regulations like no other president had done before.we ordered all federal workers to return to the office. they will either show up for work in person or be removed from their job.and we have ended weaponized government, where, as an example, a sitting president is allowed to viciously prosecute his political opponent, like me. how did that work out? not too good. not too good.and i have stopped all government censorship and brought back free speech in america. it’s back.and two days ago, i signed an order making english the official language of the united states of america. i renamed the gulf of mexico the gulf of america.and, likewise, i renamed — for a great president, william mckinley — mount mckinley again. beautiful alaska. we love alaska.we’ve ended the tyranny of so-called diversity, equity, and inclusion policies all across the entire federal government and, indeed, the private sector and our military. and our country will be woke no longer.we believe that whether you are a doctor, an accountant, a lawyer, or an air traffic controller, you should be hired and promoted based on skill and competence, not race or gender. very important. you should be hired based on merit. and the supreme court, in a brave and very powerful decision, has allowed us to do so.thank you. thank you very much. thank you.we have removed the poison of critical race theory from our public schools. and i signed an order making it the official policy of the united states government that there are only two genders: male and female.i also signed an executive order to ban men from playing in women’s sports.three years ago, payton mcnabb was an all-star high school athlete — one of the best — preparing for a future in college sports. but when her girls’ volleyball match was invaded by a male, he smashed the ball so hard in payton’s face, causing traumatic brain injury, partially paralyzing her right side, and ending her athletic career. it was a shot like she’s never seen before. she’s never seen anything like it.payton is here tonight in the gallery. and, payton, from now on, schools will kick the men off the girls’ team or they will lose all federal funding.and if you really want to see numbers, just take a look at what happened in the woman’s boxing, weightlifting, track and field, swimming, or cycling, where a male recently finished a long-distance race five hours and 14 minutes ahead of a woman for a new record by five hours. broke the record by five hours.it’s demeaning for women, and it’s very bad for our country. we’re not going to put up with it any longer.what i have just described is only a small fraction of the commonsense revolution that is now, because of us, sweeping the entire world. common sense has become a common theme, and we will never go back. never. never going to let that happen.among my very highest priorities is to rescue our economy and get dramatic and immediate relief to working families. as you know, we inherited from the last administration an economic catastrophe and an inflation nightmare. their policies drove up energy prices, pushed up grocery costs, and drove the necessities of life out of reach for millions and millions of americans. they’ve never had anything like it.we suffered the worst inflation in 48 years but perhaps even in the history of our country. they’re not sure. as president, i’m fighting every day to reverse this damage and make america affordable again.joe biden especially let the price of eggs get out of control. the egg price is out of control, and we’re working hard to get it back down.secretary, do a good job on that. you inherited a total mess from the previous administration. do a good job.a major focus of our fight to defeat inflation is rapidly reducing the cost of energy. the previous administration cut the number of new oil and gas leases by 95 percent, slowed pipeline construction to a halt, and closed more than 100 power plants. we are opening up many of those power plants right now.and, frankly, we have never seen anything like it. that’s why, on my first day in office, i declared a national energy emergency. as you’ve heard me say many times, we have more liquid gold under our feet than any nation on earth and by far. and now i’ve fully authorized the most talented team ever assembled to go and get it. it’s called drill, baby, drill.my administration is also working on a gigantic natural gas pipeline in alaska — among the largest in the world — where japan, south korea, and other nations want to be our partner with investments of trillions of dollars each. there’s never been anything like that one. it will be truly spectacular. it’s all set to go. the permitting is gotten.and later this week, i will also take historic action to dramatically expand production of critical minerals and rare earths here in the usa.to further combat inflation, we will not only be reducing the cost of energy, but we’ll be ending the flagrant waste of taxpayer dollars. and to that end, i have created the brand-new department of government efficiency – doge. perhaps you’ve heard of it — perhaps — which is headed by elon musk, who is in the gallery tonight.thank you, elon. he’s working very hard. he didn’t need this. he didn’t need this. thank you very much. we appreciate it. everybody here, even this side, appreciates it, i believe. they just don’t want to admit that.just listen to some of the appalling waste we have already identified.$22 billion from hhs to provide free housing and cars for illegal aliens.$45 million for diversity, equity, and inclusion scholarships in burma.$40 million to improve the social and economic inclusion of sedentary migrants. nobody knows what that is.$8 million to promote lgbtqi+ in the african nation of lesotho, which nobody has ever heard of.$60 million for indigenous peoples and afro-colombian empowerment in central america. $60 million.$8 million for making mice transgender. this is real.$32 million for a left-wing propaganda operation in moldova.$10 million for male circumcision in mozambique.$20 million for the arab “sesame street” in the middle east. it’s a program. $20 million for a program.$1.9 billion to recently created decarbonization of homes committee, headed up — and we know she’s involved — just at the last moment, the money was passed over — by a woman named stacey abrams. have you ever heard of her?a $3.5 million consulting contract for lavish fish monitoring.$1.5 million for voter confidence in liberia.$14 million for social cohesion in mali.$59 million for illegal alien hotel rooms in new york city.he’s a real estate developer. he’s done very well.$250,000 to increase vegan local climate action innovation in zambia.$42 million for social and behavior change in uganda.$14 million for improving public procurement in serbia.$47 million for improving learning outcomes in asia. asia is doing very well with learning. don’t know what we’re doing. we should use it ourselves.and $101 million for dei contracts at the department of education, the most ever paid. nothing even like it.under the trump administration, all of these scams — and there are far worse, but i didn’t think it was appropriate to talk about them. they’re so bad. many more have been found out and exposed and swiftly terminated by a group of very intelligent, mostly young people, headed up by elon. and we appreciate it. we’ve found hundreds of billions of dollars of fraud.and we’ve taken back the money and reduced our debt to fight inflation and other things. taken back a lot of that money. we got it just in time.this is just the beginning. the government accountability office, a federal government office, has estimated annual fraud of over $500 billion in our nation, and we are working very hard to stop it. we’re going to.we’re also identifying shocking levels of incompetence and probable fraud in the social security program for our seniors and that our seniors and people that we love rely on. believe it or not, government databases list 4.7 million social security members from people aged 100 to 109 years old.it lists 3.6 million people from ages 110 to 119. i don’t know any of them. i know some people that are rather elderly, but not quite that elderly.3.47 million people from ages 120 to 129.3.9 million people from ages 130 to 139.3.5 million people from ages 140 to 149.and money is being paid to many of them, and we’re searching right now.in fact, pam, good luck. good luck. you’re going to find it.but a lot of money is paid out to people because it just keeps getting paid and paid, and nobody does — and it really hurts social security and hurts our country.1.3 million people from ages 150 to 159. and over 130,000 people, according to the social security databases, are age over 160 years old.we have a healthier country than i thought, bobby.including, to finish, 1,039 people between the ages of 220 and 229; one person between the age of 240 and 249; and one person is listed at 360 years of age.more than 100 years older than our country.but we’re going to find out where that money is going, and it’s not going to be pretty.by slashing all of the fraud, waste, and theft we can find, we will defeat inflation, bring down mortgage rates, lower car payments and grocery prices, protect our seniors, and put more money in the pockets of american families.and today, interest rates took a beautiful drop — big, beautiful drop. it’s about time.and in the near future, i want to do what has not been done in 24 years: balance the federal budget. we’re going to balance it.with that goal in mind, we have developed in great detail what we are calling the gold card, which goes on sale very, very soon.for $5 million, we will allow the most successful, job-creating people from all over the world to buy a path to u.s. citizenship. it’s like the green card but better and more sophisticated. and these people will have to pay tax in our country. they won’t have to pay tax from where they came. the money that they’ve made, you wouldn’t want to do that, but they have to pay tax, create jobs.they’ll also be taking people out of colleges and paying for them so that we can keep them in our country, instead of having them being forced out. number one at the top school, as an example, being forced out and not being allowed to stay and create tremendous numbers of jobs and great success for a company out there.so, while we take out the criminals, killers, traffickers, and child predators who were allowed to enter our country under the open border policy of these people — the democrats, the biden administration — the open border, insane policies that you’ve allowed to destroy our country — we will now bring in brilliant, hardworking, job-creating people. they’re going to pay a lot of money, and we’re going to reduce our debt with that money.americans have given us a mandate for bold and profound change. for nearly 100 years, the federal bureaucracy has grown until it has crushed our freedoms, ballooned our deficits, and held back america’s potential in every possible way. the nation founded by pioneers and risk-takers now drowns under millions and millions of pages of regulations and debt.approvals that should take 10 days to get instead take 10 years, 15 years, and even 20 years before you’re rejected. meanwhile, we have hundreds of thousands of federal workers who have not been showing up to work.my administration will reclaim power from this unaccountable bureaucracy, and we will restore true democracy to america again. any federal bureaucrat who resists this change will be removed from office immediately because we are draining the swamp. it’s very simple. and the days of rule by unelected bureaucrats are over.and the next phase of our plan to deliver the greatest economy in history is for this congress to pass tax cuts for everybody. they’re in there. they’re waiting for you to vote.and i’m sure that the people on my right — i don’t mean the republican right, but my right right here — i’m sure you’re going to vote for those tax cuts, because, otherwise, i don’t believe the people will ever vote you into office. so, i’m doing you a big favor by telling you that.but i know this group is going to be voting for the taxes.thank you. it’s a very, very big part of our plan. we had tremendous success in our first term with it. a very big part of our plan. we’re seeking permanent income tax cuts all across the board.and to get urgently needed relief to americans hit especially hard by inflation, i’m calling for no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on social security benefits for our great seniors.(addressing speaker johnson.) good luck.and i also want to make interest payments on car loans tax deductible but only if the car is made in america.and, by the way, we’re going to have growth in the auto industry like nobody has ever seen. plants are opening up all over the place. deals are being made. never seen. that’s a combination of the election win and tariffs.it’s a beautiful word, isn’t it?that, along with our other policies, will allow our auto industry to absolutely boom. it’s going to boom. spoke to the majors today — all three — the top people, and they’re so excited. in fact, already, numerous car companies have announced that they will be building massive automobile plants in america, with honda just announcing a new plant in indiana, one of the largest anywhere in the world.and this has taken place since our great victory on november 5th, a date which will hopefully go down as one of the most important in the history of our country.in addition, as part of our tax cuts, we want to cut taxes on domestic production and all manufacturing. and just as we did before, we will provide 100 percent expensing. it will be retroactive to january 20th, 2025, and it was one of the main reasons why our tax cuts were so successful in our first term, giving us the most successful economy in the history of our country. first term — we had a great first term.if you don’t make your product in america, however, under the trump administration, you will pay a tariff and, in some cases, a rather large one. other countries have used tariffs against us for decades, and now it’s our turn to start using them against those other countries.on average, the european union, china, brazil, india, mexico, and canada — have you heard of them? — and countless other nations charge us tremendously higher tariffs than we charge them. it’s very unfair. india charges us auto tariffs higher than 100 percent. china’s average tariff on our products is twice what we charge them. and south korea’s average tariff is four times higher. think of that: four times higher. and we give so much help militarily and in so many other ways to south korea, but that’s what happens.this is happening by friend and foe. this system is not fair to the united states and never was. and so, on april 2nd — i wanted to make it april 1st, but i didn’t want to be accused of april fool’s day. just one day, which cost us a lot of money. but we’re going to do it in april. i’m a very superstitious person. april 2nd, reciprocal tariffs kick in. and whatever they tariff us — other countries — we will tariff them. that’s reciprocal, back and forth. whatever they tax us, we will tax them.if they do non-monetary tariffs to keep us out of their market, then we will do non-monetary barriers to keep them out of our market. there’s a lot of that too. they don’t even allow us in their market.we will take in trillions and trillions of dollars and create jobs like we have never seen before. i did it with china, and i did it with others. and the biden administration couldn’t do anything about it because it was so much money. they couldn’t do anything about it.we have been ripped off for decades by nearly every country on earth, and we will not let that happen any longer.much has been said over the last three months about mexico and canada, but we have very large deficits with both of them. but even more importantly, they have allowed fentanyl to come into our country at levels never seen before, killing hundreds of thousands of our citizens and many very young, beautiful people — destroying families. nobody has ever seen anything like it.they are, in effect, receiving subsidies of hundreds of billions of dollars. we pay subsidies to canada and to mexico of hundreds of billions of dollars. and the united states will not be doing that any longer. we’re not going to do it any longer.thanks to our america first policies we’re putting into place, we have had $1.7 trillion of new investment in america in just the past few weeks. the combination of the election and our economic policies — the people of softbank, one of the most brilliant anywhere in the world, announced a $200 billion investment. openai and oracle — larry ellison — announced $500 billion investment, which they wouldn’t have done if kamala had won.apple announced $500 billion investment. tim cook called me. he said, “i cannot spend it fast enough.” it’s going to be much higher than that, i believe. they’ll be building their plants here, instead of in china.and just yesterday, taiwan semiconductor — the biggest in the world, most powerful in the world, has a tremendous amount — 97 percent of the market, announced a $165 billion investment to build the most powerful chips on earth right here in the usa.and we’re not giving them any money. your chips act is a horrible, horrible thing. we give hundreds of billions of dollars, and it doesn’t mean a thing. they take our money, and they don’t spend it. all that meant to them — we’re giving them no money. all that was important to them was they didn’t want to pay the tariffs, so they came and they’re building. and many other companies are coming.we don’t have to give them money. we just want to protect our businesses and our people. and they will come because they won’t have to pay tariffs if they build in america. and so, it’s very amazing.you should get rid of the chip act. and whatever is left over, mr. speaker, you should use it to reduce debt or any other reason you want to.our new trade policy will also be great for the american farmer — i love the farmer — who will now be selling into our home market, the usa, because nobody is going to be able to compete with you. because those goods that come in from other countries and companies, they’re really, really in a bad position in so many different ways. they’re uninspected. they may be very dirty and disgusting, and they come in and they pour in, and they hurt our american farmers.the tariffs will go on agricultural product coming into america. and our farmers, starting on april 2nd — it may be a little bit of an adjustment period. we had that before, when i made the deal with china. fifty billion dollars of purchases, and i said, “just bear with me,” and they did. they did. probably have to bear with me again, and this will be even better.that was great. the problem with it was that biden didn’t enforce it. he didn’t enforce it. fifty billion dollars of purchases, and we were doing great, but biden did not enforce it. and it hurt our farmers, but our farmers are going to have a field day right now.so, to our farmers, have a lot of fun. i love you too. i love you too. it’s all going to happen.and i have also imposed a 25 percent tariff on foreign aluminum, copper, lumber, and steel, because if we don’t have, as an example, steel and lots of other things, we don’t have a military and, frankly, we just won’t have a country very long.here today is a proud american steelworker, fantastic person from decatur, alabama. jeff denard has been working at the same steel plant for 27 years in a job that has allowed him to serve as the captain of his local volunteer fire department; raise seven children with his beautiful wife, nicole; and over the years, provide a loving home for more than 40 foster children. so great, jeff.thank you, jeff. thank you, jeff.stories like jeff’s remind us that tariffs are not just about protecting american jobs. they’re about protecting the soul of our country. tariffs are about making america rich again and making america great again. and it’s happening, and it will happen rather quickly.there will be a little disturbance, but we’re okay with that. it won’t be much.no, you’re not. oh.and look — and look where biden took us. very low. the lowest we’ve ever been.jeff, i want to thank you very much.and i also want to recognize another person who has devoted herself to foster care community. she worked so hard on it. a very loving person. our magnificent first lady of the united states.melania’s work has yielded incredible results, helping prepare our nation’s future leaders as they enter the workforce.our first lady is joined by two impressive young women — very impressive: haley ferguson, who benefited from the first lady’s fostering the future initiative and is poised to complete her education and become a teacher, and elliston berry, who became a victim of an illicit deepfake image produced by a peer. with elliston’s help, the senate just passed the take it down act —this is so important. thank you very much, john. john thune, thank you. stand up, john. thank you, john. thank you all very much. thank you.and thank you to john thune and the senate. a great job.— to criminalize the publication of such images online. this terrible, terrible thing. and once it passes the house, i look forward to signing that bill into law. thank you.and i’m going to use that bill for myself too, if you don’t mind because nobody gets treated worse than i do online. nobody.that’s great. thank you very much to the senate. thank you.but if we truly care about protecting america’s children, no step is more crucial than securing america’s borders. over the past four years, 21 million people poured into the united states. many of them were murderers, human traffickers, gang members, and other criminals from the streets of dangerous cities all throughout the world. because of joe biden’s insane and very dangerous open border policies, they are now strongly embedded in our country, but we are getting them out and getting them out fast.and i want to thank tom homan. and, kristi, i want to thank you. and paul of border patrol, i want to thank you. what a job they’ve all done. everybody. border patrol, ice. law enforcement, in general, is incredible. we have to take care of our law enforcement. we have to.last year, a brilliant 22-year-old nursing student named laken riley — the best in her class, admired by everybody — went out for a jog on the campus of the university of georgia. that morning, laken was viciously attacked, assaulted, beaten, brutalized, and horrifically murdered. laken was stolen from us by a savage illegal alien gang member who was arrested while trespassing across biden’s open southern border and then set loose into the united states under the heartless policies of that failed administration. it was indeed a failed administration.he had then been arrested and released in a democrat-run sanctuary city — a disaster — before ending the life of this beautiful young angel.with us this evening are laken’s beloved mother, allyson, and her sister, lauren.last year, i told laken’s grieving parents that we would ensure their daughter would not have died in vain. that’s why the very first bill i signed into law as your 47th president mandates the detention of all dangerous criminal aliens who threaten public safety. it’s a very strong, powerful act. it’s called the laken riley act.so, allyson and lauren, america will never, ever forget our beautiful laken hope riley.thank you very much.since taking office, my administration has launched the most sweeping border and immigration crackdown in american history, and we quickly achieved the lowest numbers of illegal border crossers ever recorded. thank you.the media and our friends in the democrat party kept saying we needed new legislation. “we must have legislation to secure the border.” but it turned out that all we really needed was a new president.thank you.joe biden didn’t just open our borders. he flew illegal aliens over them to overwhelm our schools, hospitals, and communities throughout the country. entire towns, like aurora, colorado, and springfield, ohio, buckled under the weight of the migrant occupation and corruption like nobody has ever seen before. beautiful towns destroyed.now, just as i promised in my inaugural address, we are achieving the great liberation of america.but there still is much work to be done.here tonight is a woman i have gotten to know: alexis nungaray from houston. wonderful woman. last june, alexis’s 12-year-old daughter, her precious jocelyn, walked to a nearby convenience store. she was kidnapped, tied up, assaulted for two hours under a bridge, and horrifically murdered. arrested and charged with this heinous crime are two illegal alien monsters from venezuela, released into america by the last administration through their ridiculous open border.the death of this beautiful 12-year-old girl and the agony of her mother and family touched our entire nation greatly.alexis, i promised that we would always remember your daughter — your magnificent daughter. and earlier tonight, i signed an order keeping my word to you.one thing i have learned about jocelyn is that she loved animals so much. she loved nature. across galveston bay from where jocelyn lived in houston, you will find a magnificent national wildlife refuge. a pristine, peaceful, 34,000-acre sanctuary for all of god’s creatures on the edge of the gulf of america.alexis, moments ago, i formally renamed that refuge in loving memory of your beautiful daughter, jocelyn.so, mr. vice president, if you would, may i have the order?(the president holds up the executive order.)thank you very much.all three savages charged with jocelyn and laken’s murders were members of the venezuelan prison gang — the toughest gang, they say, in the world — known as tren de aragua. two weeks ago, i officially designated this gang, along with ms-13 and the bloodthirsty mexican drug cartels, as foreign terrorist organizations. they are now officially in the same category as isis, and that’s not good for them.countless thousands of these terrorists were welcomed into the u.s. by the biden administration, but now every last one will be rounded up and forcibly removed from our country, or, if they’re too dangerous, put in jails, standing trial in this country, because we don’t want them to come back ever.with us this evening is a warrior on the front lines of that battle, border patrol agent roberto ortiz. great guy.in january, roberto and another agent were patrolling by the rio grande, near an area known as cartel island — doesn’t sound too nice to me — when heavily armed gunmen started shooting at them. roberto saw that his partner was totally exposed, in great danger, and he leapt into action, returning fire and providing crucial seconds for his fellow agent to seek safety, and just barely. i have some of the prints of that event, and it was not good.agent ortiz, we salute you for your great courage and for your line of fire that you took and for the bravery that you showed. we honor you, and we will always honor you. thank you, roberto, very much. thank you, roberto.and i actually got to know him on my many calls to the border. he’s a great, great gentleman.the territory to the immediate south of our border is now dominated entirely by criminal cartels that murder, rape, torture, and exercise total control — they have total control over a whole nation — posing a grave threat to our national security. the cartels are waging war in america, and it’s time for america to wage war on the cartels, which we are doing.five nights ago, mexican authorities, because of our tariff policies being imposed on them — think of this — handed over to us 29 of the biggest cartel leaders in their country. that has never happened before. hey want to make us happy. first time ever.but we need mexico and canada to do much more than they’ve done, and they have to stop the fentanyl and drugs pouring into the usa. they’re going to stop it.i have sent congress a detailed funding request laying out exactly how we will eliminate these threats to protect our homeland and complete the largest deportation operation in american history, larger even than current record holder, president dwight d. eisenhower, a moderate man but someone who believed very strongly in borders. americans expect congress to send me this funding without delay so i can sign it into law.so, mr. speaker, john thune, both of you, i hope you’re going to be able to do that. mr. speaker, thank you. mr. leader, thank you. thank you very much. and let’s get it to me. i’ll sign it so fast, you won’t even believe it.and as we reclaim our sovereignty, we must also bring back law and order to our cities and towns. in recent years, our justice system has been turned upside down by radical-left lunatics. many jurisdictions virtually ceased enforcing the law against dangerous repeat offenders while weaponizing law enforcement against political opponents like me.my administration has acted swiftly and decisively to restore fair, equal, and impartial justice under the constitutional rule of law, starting at the fbi and the doj.pam, good luck. kash, wherever you may be, good luck. good luck. pam bondi, good luck. so important. going to do a great job.kash, thank you. thank you, kash.they have already started very strong. they’re going to do a fantastic job. you’re going to be very proud of them.we’re also, once again, giving our police officers the support, protection, and respect they so dearly deserve. they have to get it. they have such a hard, dangerous job, but we’re going to make it less dangerous. the problem is the bad guys don’t respect the law, but they’re starting to respect it, and they soon will respect it.this also includes our great fire departments throughout the country. our firemen and women are unbelievable people, and i will never forget them. and besides that, they voted for me in record numbers, so i have no choice.one year ago this month, 31-year-old new york police officer jonathan diller — unbelievably wonderful person and a great officer — was gunned down at a traffic stop on long island. i went to his funeral. the vicious criminal charged with his murder had 21 prior arrests, and they were rough arrests too. he was a real bad one.the thug in the seat next to him had 14 prior arrests and went by the name of “killer.” he was killer. he killed other people. they say a lot of them.i attended officer diller’s service, and when i met his wife and one-year-old son, ryan, it was very inspirational, actually. his widow’s name is stephanie, and she is here tonight. stephanie, thank you very much, stephanie. thank you very much.stephanie, we’re going to make sure that ryan knows his dad was a true hero — new york’s finest. and we’re going to get these cold-blooded killers and repeat offenders off our streets, and we’re going to do it fast. got to stop it.they get out with 28 arrests. they push people into subway trains. they hit people over the back of the head with baseball bats. we got to get them out of here.i’ve already signed an executive order requiring a mandatory death penalty for anyone who murders a police officer. and, tonight, i’m asking congress to pass that policy into permanent law.i’m also asking for a new crime bill, getting tough on repeat offenders while enhancing protections for america’s police officers so they can do their jobs without fear of their lives being totally destroyed. they don’t want to be killed. we’re not going to let them be killed.joining us in the gallery tonight is a young man who truly loves our police. his name is d.j. daniel. he is 13 years old, and he has always dreamed of becoming a police officer.but in 2018, d.j. was diagnosed with brain cancer. the doctors gave him five months at most to live. that was more than six years ago.since that time, d.j. and his dad have been on a quest to make his dream come true, and d.j. has been sworn in as an honorary law enforcement officer, actually, a number of times. the police love him. the police departments love him.and tonight, d.j., we’re going to do you the biggest honor of them all. i am asking our new secret service director, sean curran, to officially make you an agent of the united states secret service.(director curran presents mr. daniel with a secret service agent credential.)audience: d.j.! d.j.! d.j.!the president: thank you, d.j.d.j.’s doctors believe his cancer likely came from a chemical he was exposed to when he was younger. since 1975, rates of child cancer have increased by more than 40 percent. reversing this trend is one of the top priorities for our new presidential commission to make america healthy again, chaired by our new secretary of health and human services, robert f. kennedy, jr.with the name “kennedy,” you would have thought everybody over here would have been cheering. how quickly they forget.our goal is to get toxins out of our environment, poisons out of our food supply, and keep our children healthy and strong.as an example, not long ago — you can’t even believe these numbers — 1 in 10,000 children had autism. 1 in 10,000. and now it’s 1 in 36. there’s something wrong. one in 36. think of that.so, we’re going to find out what it is, and there’s nobody better than bobby and all of the people that are working with you — you have the best — to figure out what is going on.okay, bobby? good luck. it’s a very important job. thank you. thank you. thank you.my administration is also working to protect our children from toxic ideologies in our schools.a few years ago, january littlejohn and her husband discovered that their daughter’s school had secretly socially transitioned their 13-year-old little girl. teachers and administrators conspired to deceive january and her husband, while encouraging her daughter to use a new name and pronouns — “they/them” pronouns, actually — all without telling january, who is here tonight and is now a courageous advocate against this form of child abuse. january, thank you. thank you. thank you very much. thank you. thank you.stories like this are why, shortly after taking office, i signed an executive order banning public schools from indoctrinating our children with transgender ideology.i also signed an order to cut off all taxpayer funding to any institution that engages in the sexual mutilation of our youth. and now i want congress to pass a bill permanently banning and criminalizing sex changes on children and forever ending the lie that any child is trapped in the wrong body. this is a big lie.and our message to every child in america is that you are perfect exactly the way god made you.because we’re getting wokeness out of our schools and out of our military, and it’s already out, and it’s out of our society. we don’t want it. wokeness is trouble. wokeness is bad. it’s gone. it’s gone. and we feel so much better for it, don’t we? don’t we feel better?our service members won’t be activists and ideologues. they will be fighters and warriors. they will fight for our country.and, pete, congratulations. secretary of defense, congratulations.and he’s not big into the woke movement, i can tell you. i know him well.i am pleased to report that, in january, the u.s. army had its single best recruiting month in 15 years and that all armed services are having among the best recruiting results ever in the history of our services. what a difference.and you know it was just a few months ago where the results were exactly the opposite. we couldn’t recruit anywhere. we couldn’t recruit. now we’re having the best results, just about, that we’ve ever had. what a tremendous turnaround. it’s really a beautiful thing to see. people love our country again. it’s very simple. they love our country, and they love being in our military again. so, it’s a great thing. and thank you very much. great job. thank you.we’re joined tonight by a young man, jason hartley, who knows the weight of that call of duty. jason’s father, grandfather, and great-grandfather all wore the uniform.jason tragically lost his dad, who was also a los angeles county sheriff’s deputy, when he was just a boy, and now he wants to carry on the family legacy of service. jason is a senior in high school, a six-letter varsity athlete — a really good athlete, they say — a brilliant student, with a 4.46 — and his greatest dream is to attend the u.s. military academy at west point.and, jason, that’s a very big deal getting in. that’s a hard one to get into. but i’m pleased to inform you that your application has been accepted. you will soon be joining the corps of cadets.thank you. jason, you’re going to be on the long gray line, jason.as commander in chief, my focus is on building the most powerful military of the future. as a first step, i’m asking congress to fund a state-of-the-art golden dome missile defense shield to protect our homeland, all made in the usa.and ronald reagan wanted to do it long ago, but the technology just wasn’t there, not even close. but now we have the technology. it’s incredible, actually. and other places, they have it: israel has it. other places have it. and the united states should have it too. right, tim? right? they should have it too. so, i want to thank you.but it’s a very important. this is a very dangerous world. we should have it. we want to be protected. and we’re going to protect our citizens like never before.to boost our defense industrial base, we are also going to resurrect the american shipbuilding industry, including commercial shipbuilding and military shipbuilding.and for that purpose, i am announcing tonight that we will create a new office of shipbuilding in the white house and offer special tax incentives to bring this industry home to america, where it belongs.we used to make so many ships. we don’t make them anymore very much, but we’re going to make them very fast, very soon. it will have a huge impact.to further enhance our national security, my administration will be reclaiming the panama canal, and we’ve already started doing it.just today, a large american company announced they are buying both ports around the panama canal and lots of other things having to do with the panama canal and a couple of other canals.the panama canal was built by americans for americans, not for others, but others could use it. but it was built at tremendous cost of american blood and treasure. thirty-eight thousand workers died building the panama canal. they died of malaria. they died of snake bites and mosquitoes. not a nice place to work. they paid them very highly to go there, knowing there was a 25 percent chance that they would die. the most expensive project, also, that was ever built in our country’s history, if you bring it up to modern-day costs.it was given away by the carter administration for $1, but that agreement has been violated very severely. we didn’t give it to china. we gave it to panama, and we’re taking it back.and we have marco rubio in charge. good luck, marco. now we know who to blame if anything goes wrong.no, marco has been amazing, and he’s going to do a great job. think of it. he got a hundred votes. you know, he was approved with, actually, 99, but the 100th was this gentleman, and i feel very certain — so, let’s assume he got 100 votes. and i’m either very, very happy about that or i’m very concerned about it.but he’s already proven — i mean, he’s a great gentleman. he’s respected by everybody. and we appreciate you voting for marco. he’s going to do a fantastic job. hank you. thank you. he’s doing a great job. great job.and i also have a message tonight for the incredible people of greenland. we strongly support your right to determine your own future, and, if you choose, we welcome you into the united states of america.we need greenland for national security and even international security, and we’re working with everybody involved to try and get it. but we need it, really, for international world security. and i think we’re going to get it. one way or the other, we’re going to get it.we will keep you safe. we will make you rich. and together, we will take greenland to heights like you have never thought possible before.it’s a very small population but very, very large piece of land and very, very important for military security.america is once again standing strong against the forces of radical islamic terrorism.three and a half years ago, isis terrorists killed 13 american service members and countless others in the abbey gate bombing during the disastrous and incompetent withdrawal from afghanistan — not that they were withdrawing; it was the way they withdrew. perhaps the most embarrassing moment in the history of our country.tonight, i am pleased to announce that we have just apprehended the top terrorist responsible for that atrocity, and he is right now on his way here to face the swift sword of american justice.and i want to thank, especially, the government of pakistan for helping arrest this monster.this was a very momentous day for those 13 families, who i actually got to know very well, most of them, whose children were murdered, and the many people that were so badly — over 42 people — so badly injured on that fateful day in afghanistan. what a horrible day. such incompetence was shown that when putin saw what happened, i guess he said, “wow, maybe this is my chance.” that’s how bad it was. should have never happened. grossly incompetent people.i spoke to many of the parents and loved ones, and they’re all in our hearts tonight. just spoke to them on the phone. we had a big call. every one of them called, and everybody was on the line, and they did nothing but cry with happiness. they were very happy — as happy as you can be under those circumstances. heir child, brother, sister, son, daughter was killed for no reason whatsoever.in the middle east, we’re bringing back our hostages from gaza. in my first term, we achieved one of the most groundbreaking peace agreements in generations: the abraham accords.and now we’re going to build on that foundation to create a more peaceful and prosperous future for the entire region. a lot of things are happening in the middle east. people haven’t been talking about that so much lately with everything going on with ukraine and russia, but a lot of things are happening in the middle east. it’s a rough neighborhood, actually.i’m also working tirelessly to end the savage conflict in ukraine. millions of ukrainians and russians have been needlessly killed or wounded in this horrific and brutal conflict with no end in sight.the united states has sent hundreds of billions of dollars to support ukraine’s defense with no security, with no anything.do you want to keep it going for another five years?senator warren: yes!the president: yeah. yeah, you would say — pocahontas says, “yes.”two thousand people are being killed every single week — more than that. they’re russian young people. they’re ukrainian young people. they’re not americans. but i want it to stop.meanwhile, europe has sadly spent more money buying russian oil and gas than they have spent on defending ukraine, by far. think of that. they’ve spent more buying russian oil and gas than they have defending. and we’ve spent, perhaps, $350 billion. like taking candy from a baby, that’s what happened. and they’ve spent $100 billion. what a difference that is. and we have an ocean separating us, and they don’t.but we’re getting along very well with them, and lots of good things are happening.biden has authorized more money in this fight than europe has spent by billions and billions of dollars. it’s hard to believe that they wouldn’t have stopped it and said, at some point, “come on. let’s equalize. you got to be equal to us.” but that didn’t happen.earlier today, i received an important letter from president zelenskyy of ukraine. the letter reads, “ukraine is ready to come to the negotiating table as soon as possible to bring lasting peace closer.” “nobody wants peace more than the ukrainians,” he said. “my team and i stand ready to work under president trump’s strong leadership to get a peace that lasts. we do really value how much america has done to help ukraine maintain its sovereignty and independence. regarding the agreement on minerals and security, ukraine is ready to sign it at any time that is convenient for you.”i appreciate that he sent this letter. just got it a little while ago.simultaneously, we’ve had serious discussions with russia and have received strong signals that they are ready for peace. wouldn’t that be beautiful? wouldn’t that be beautiful? wouldn’t that be beautiful?it’s time to stop this madness. t’s time to halt the killing. it’s time to end this senseless war. if you want to end wars, you have to talk to both sides.nearly four years ago, amid rising tensions, a history teacher named marc fogel was detained in russia and sentenced to 14 years in a penal colony. rough stuff.the previous administration barely lifted a finger to help him. they knew he was innocent, but they had no idea where to begin. but last summer, i promised his 95-year-old mother, malphine, that we would bring her boy safely back home.after 22 days in office, i did just that, and they are here tonight.to marc and his great mom, we are delighted to have you safe and sound and with us.as fate would have it, marc fogel was born in a small, rural town — in butler, pennsylvania — have you heard of it? — where his mother has lived for the past 78 years.i just happened to go there last july 13th for a rally. that was not pleasant. and that is where i met his beautiful mom, right before i walked onto that stage. and i told her i would not forget what she said about her son. and i never did, did i? never forgot.less than 10 minutes later, at that same rally, gunfire rang out, and a sick and deranged assassin unloaded eight bullets from his sniper’s perch into a crowd of many thousands of people.my life was saved by a fraction of an inch, but some were not so lucky. corey comperatore was a firefighter, a veteran, a christian, a husband, a devoted father, and, above all, a protector.when the sound of gunshots pierced the air — it was a horrible sound — corey knew instantly what it was and what to do. he threw himself on top of his wife and daughters and shielded them from the bullets with his own body.corey was hit really hard. you know the story from there. he sacrificed his life to save theirs.two others — very fine people — were also seriously hit. but thankfully, with the help of two great country doctors, we thought they were gone, and they were saved. so, those doctors had great talent.we’re joined by corey’s wife, helen, who was his high school sweetheart, and their two beloved daughters, allyson and kaylee. thank you.to helen, allyson, and kaylee, corey is looking down on his three beautiful ladies right now, and he is cheering you on. he loves you. he is cheering you on.corey was taken from us much too soon, but his destiny was to leave us all with a shining example of the selfless devotion of a true american patriot. it was love like corey’s that built our country, and it’s love like corey’s that is going to make our country more majestic than ever before.i believe that my life was saved that day in butler for a very good reason. i was saved by god to make america great again. ;i believe that. thank you.thank you. thank you very much.from the patriots of lexington and concord to the heroes of gettysburg and normandy, from the warriors who crossed the delaware to the trailblazers who climbed the rockies, and from the legends who soared at kitty hawk to the astronauts who touched the moon, americans have always been the people who defied all odds, transcended all dangers, made the most extraordinary sacrifices, and did whatever it took to defend our children, our country, and our freedom.and as we have seen in this chamber tonight, that same strength, faith, love, and spirit is still alive and thriving in the hearts of the american people. despite the best efforts of those who would try to censor us, silence us, break us, destroy us, americans are today a proud, free, sovereign, and independent nation that will always be free, and we will fight for it till death.we will never let anything happen to our beloved country, because we are a country of doers, dreamers, fighters, and survivors.our ancestors crossed a vast ocean, strode into the unknown wilderness, and carved their fortunes from the rock and soil of a perilous and very dangerous frontier. they chased our destiny across a boundless continent. they built the railroads, laid the highways, and graced the world with american marvels, like the empire state building, the mighty hoover dam, and the towering golden gate bridge.they lit the world with electricity, broke free of the force of gravity, fired up the engines of american industry, vanquished the communists, fascists, and marxists all over the world, and gave us countless modern wonders sculpted out of iron, glass, and steel.we stand on the shoulders of these pioneers who won and built the modern age, these workers who poured their sweat into the skylines of our cities, these warriors who shed their blood on fields of battle and gave everything they had for our rights and for our freedom.now it is our time to take up the righteous cause of american liberty, and it is our turn to take america’s destiny into our own hands and begin the most thrilling days in the history of our country.this will be our greatest era.with god’s help, over the next four years, we are going to lead this nation even higher, and we are going to forge the freest, most advanced, most dynamic, and most dominant civilization ever to exist on the face of this earth.we are going to create the highest quality of life, build the safest and wealthiest and healthiest and most vital communities anywhere in the world.we are going to conquer the vast frontiers of science, and we are going to lead humanity into space and plant the american flag on the planet mars and even far beyond.and, through it all, we are going to rediscover the unstoppable power of the american spirit, and we are going to renew unlimited promise of the american dream.every single day, we will stand up and we will fight, fight, fight for the country our citizens believe in and for the country our people deserve. thank you. thank you.my fellow americans, get ready for an incredible future, because the golden age of america has only just begun. t will be like nothing that has ever been seen before.thank you. god bless you. and god bless america. madam speaker, madam vice president, our first lady and second gentleman. members of congress and the cabinet. justices of the supreme court. my fellow americans. last year covid-19 kept us apart. this year we are finally together again. tonight, we meet as democrats, republicans, and independents. but most importantly as americans. with a duty to one another to the american people to the constitution. and with an unwavering resolve that freedom will always triumph over tyranny. six days ago, russia’s vladimir putin sought to shake the foundations of the free world thinking he could make it bend to his menacing ways. but he badly miscalculated. he thought he could roll into ukraine and the world would roll over. instead he met a wall of strength he never imagined. he met the ukrainian people. from president zelenskyy to every ukrainian, their fearlessness, their courage, their determination, inspires the world. groups of citizens blocking tanks with their bodies. everyone from students to retirees, teachers turned soldiers defending their homeland. in this struggle as president zelenskyy said in his speech to the european parliament “light will win over darkness.” the ukrainian ambassador to the united states is here tonight. let each of us here tonight in this chamber send an unmistakable signal to ukraine and to the world. please rise if you are able and show that, yes, we the united states of america stand with the ukrainian people. throughout our history, we’ve learned this lesson when dictators do not pay a price for their aggression, they cause more chaos. they keep moving. and the costs and the threats to america and the world keep rising. that’s why the nato alliance was created to secure peace and stability in europe after world war 2. the united states is a member along with 29 other nations. it matters. american diplomacy matters. american resolve matters. putin’s latest attack on ukraine was premeditated and unprovoked. he rejected repeated efforts at diplomacy. he thought the west and nato wouldn’t respond. and he thought he could divide us at home. putin was wrong. we were ready. here is what we did. we prepared extensively and carefully. we spent months building a coalition of other freedom-loving nations from europe and the americas to asia and africa to confront putin. i spent countless hours unifying our european allies. we shared with the world in advance what we knew putin was planning and precisely how he would try to falsely justify his aggression. we countered russia’s lies with truth. and now that he has acted, the free world is holding him accountable. along with twenty-seven members of the european union including france, germany, italy, as well as countries like the united kingdom, canada, japan, korea, australia, new zealand, and many others, even switzerland. we are inflicting pain on russia and supporting the people of ukraine. putin is now isolated from the world more than ever. together with our allies, we are right now enforcing powerful economic sanctions. we are cutting off russia’s largest banks from the international financial system. preventing russia’s central bank from defending the russian ruble, making putin’s $630 billion “war fund” worthless. we are choking off russia’s access to technology that will sap its economic strength and weaken its military for years to come. tonight, i say to the russian oligarchs and corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime, no more. the us department of justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of russian oligarchs. we are joining with our european allies to find and seize your yachts, your luxury apartments, your private jets. we are coming for your ill-begotten gains. and tonight, i am announcing that we will join our allies in closing off american air space to all russian flights—further isolating russia and adding an additional squeeze on their economy. the ruble has lost 30 percent of its value. the russian stock market has lost 40 percent of its value and trading remains suspended. russia’s economy is reeling, and putin alone is to blame. together with our allies, we are providing support to the ukrainians in their fight for freedom. military assistance. economic assistance. humanitarian assistance. we are giving more than $1 billion in direct assistance to ukraine. and we will continue to aid the ukrainian people as they defend their country and to help ease their suffering. let me be clear, our forces are not engaged and will not engage in conflict with russian forces in ukraine. our forces are not going to europe to fight in ukraine, but to defend our nato allies—in the event that putin decides to keep moving west. for that purpose, we’ve mobilized american ground forces, air squadrons, and ship deployments to protect nato countries including poland, romania, latvia, lithuania, and estonia. as i have made crystal clear, the united states and our allies will defend every inch of territory of nato countries with the full force of our collective power. and we remain clear-eyed. the ukrainians are fighting back with pure courage. but the next few days weeks, months, will be hard on them. putin has unleashed violence and chaos. but while he may make gains on the battlefield, he will pay a continuing high price over the long run. and a proud ukrainian people, who have known 30 years of independence, have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backwards. to all americans, i will be honest with you, as i’ve always promised. a russian dictator, invading a foreign country, has costs around the world. and i’m taking robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at russia’s economy. and i will use every tool at our disposal to protect american businesses and consumers. tonight, i can announce that the united states has worked with 30 other countries to release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves around the world. america will lead that effort, releasing 30 million barrels from our own strategic petroleum reserve. and we stand ready to do more if necessary, unified with our allies. these steps will help blunt gas prices here at home. and i know the news about what’s happening can seem alarming. but i want you to know that we are going to be okay. when the history of this era is written, putin’s war on ukraine will have left russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger. while it shouldn’t have taken something so terrible for people around the world to see what’s at stake, now everyone sees it clearly. we see the unity among leaders of nations and a more unified europe, a more unified west. and we see unity among the people who are gathering in cities in large crowds around the world, even in russia, to demonstrate their support for ukraine. in the battle between democracy and autocracy, democracies are rising to the moment, and the world is clearly choosing the side of peace and security. this is a real test. it’s going to take time. so let us continue to draw inspiration from the iron will of the ukrainian people. to our fellow ukrainian americans who forge a deep bond that connects our two nations, we stand with you. putin may circle kyiv with tanks, but he will never gain the hearts and souls of the ukrainian people. he will never extinguish their love of freedom. he will never weaken the resolve of the free world. we meet tonight in an america that has lived through two of the hardest years this nation has ever faced. the pandemic has been punishing. and so many families are living paycheck to paycheck, struggling to keep up with the rising cost of food, gas, housing, and so much more. i understand. i remember when my dad had to leave our home in scranton, pennsylvania to find work. i grew up in a family where if the price of food went up, you felt it. that’s why one of the first things i did as president was fight to pass the american rescue plan. because people were hurting. we needed to act, and we did. few pieces of legislation have done more in a critical moment in our history to lift us out of crisis. it fueled our efforts to vaccinate the nation and combat covid-19. it delivered immediate economic relief for tens of millions of americans. helped put food on their table, keep a roof over their heads, and cut the cost of health insurance. and as my dad used to say, it gave people a little breathing room. and unlike the $2-trillion tax cut passed in the previous administration that benefitted the top 1 percent of americans, the american rescue plan helped working people—and left no one behind. and it worked. it created jobs. lots of jobs. in fact—our economy created over 6.5 million new jobs just last year, more jobs created in one year than ever before in the history of america. our economy grew at a rate of 5.7 percent last year, the strongest growth in nearly 40 years, the first step in bringing fundamental change to an economy that hasn’t worked for the working people of this nation for too long. for the past 40 years, we were told that if we gave tax breaks to those at the very top, the benefits would trickle down to everyone else. but that trickle-down theory led to weaker economic growth, lower wages, bigger deficits, and the widest gap between those at the top and everyone else in nearly a century. vice president harris and i ran for office with a new economic vision for america. invest in america. educate americans. grow the workforce. build the economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. because we know that when the middle class grows, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy do very well. america used to have the best roads, bridges, and airports on earth. now our infrastructure is ranked 13th in the world. we won’t be able to compete for the jobs of the 21st century if we don’t fix that. that’s why it was so important to pass the bipartisan infrastructure law—the most sweeping investment to rebuild america in history. this was a bipartisan effort, and i want to thank the members of both parties who worked to make it happen. we’re done talking about infrastructure weeks. we’re going to have an infrastructure decade. it is going to transform america and put us on a path to win the economic competition of the 21st century that we face with the rest of the world—particularly with china. as i’ve told xi jinping, it is never a good bet to bet against the american people. we’ll create good jobs for millions of americans, modernizing roads, airports, ports, and waterways all across america. and we’ll do it all to withstand the devastating effects of the climate crisis and promote environmental justice. we’ll build a national network of 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations, begin to replace poisonous lead pipes—so every child—and every american—has clean water to drink at home and at school, provide affordable high-speed internet for every american—urban, suburban, rural, and tribal communities. 4,000 projects have already been announced. and tonight, i’m announcing that this year we will start fixing over 65,000 miles of highway and 1,500 bridges in disrepair. when we use taxpayer dollars to rebuild america—we are going to buy american: buy american products to support american jobs. the federal government spends about $600 billion a year to keep the country safe and secure. there’s been a law on the books for almost a century to make sure taxpayers’ dollars support american jobs and businesses. every administration says they’ll do it, but we are actually doing it. we will buy american to make sure everything from the deck of an aircraft carrier to the steel on highway guardrails are made in america. but to compete for the best jobs of the future, we also need to level the playing field with china and other competitors. that’s why it is so important to pass the bipartisan innovation act sitting in congress that will make record investments in emerging technologies and american manufacturing. let me give you one example of why it’s so important to pass it. if you travel 20 miles east of columbus, ohio, you’ll find 1,000 empty acres of land. it won’t look like much, but if you stop and look closely, you’ll see a “field of dreams,” the ground on which america’s future will be built. this is where intel, the american company that helped build silicon valley, is going to build its $20 billion semiconductor “mega site.” up to eight state-of-the-art factories in one place, 10,000 new good-paying jobs. some of the most sophisticated manufacturing in the world to make computer chips the size of a fingertip that power the world and our everyday lives. smartphones. the internet. technology we have yet to invent. but that’s just the beginning. intel’s ceo, pat gelsinger, who is here tonight, told me they are ready to increase their investment from $20 billion to $100 billion. that would be one of the biggest investments in manufacturing in american history. and all they’re waiting for is for you to pass this bill. so let’s not wait any longer. send it to my desk. i’ll sign it. and we will really take off. and intel is not alone. there’s something happening in america. just look around and you’ll see an amazing story. the rebirth of the pride that comes from stamping products “made in america.” the revitalization of american manufacturing. companies are choosing to build new factories here, when just a few years ago, they would have built them overseas. that’s what is happening. ford is investing $11 billion to build electric vehicles, creating 11,000 jobs across the country. gm is making the largest investment in its history—$7 billion to build electric vehicles, creating 4,000 jobs in michigan. all told, we created 369,000 new manufacturing jobs in america just last year. powered by people i’ve met like jojo burgess, from generations of union steelworkers from pittsburgh, who’s here with us tonight. as ohio senator sherrod brown says, “it’s time to bury the label “rust belt.” it’s time. but with all the bright spots in our economy, record job growth and higher wages, too many families are struggling to keep up with the bills. inflation is robbing them of the gains they might otherwise feel. i get it. that’s why my top priority is getting prices under control. look, our economy roared back faster than most predicted, but the pandemic meant that businesses had a hard time hiring enough workers to keep up production in their factories. the pandemic also disrupted global supply chains. when factories close, it takes longer to make goods and get them from the warehouse to the store, and prices go up. look at cars. last year, there weren’t enough semiconductors to make all the cars that people wanted to buy. and guess what, prices of automobiles went up. so—we have a choice. one way to fight inflation is to drive down wages and make americans poorer. i have a better plan to fight inflation. lower your costs, not your wages. make more cars and semiconductors in america. more infrastructure and innovation in america. more goods moving faster and cheaper in america. more jobs where you can earn a good living in america. and instead of relying on foreign supply chains, let’s make it in america. economists call it “increasing the productive capacity of our economy.” i call it building a better america. my plan to fight inflation will lower your costs and lower the deficit. seventeen nobel laureates in economics say my plan will ease long-term inflationary pressures. top business leaders and most americans support my plan. and here’s the plan: first—cut the cost of prescription drugs. just look at insulin. one in ten americans has diabetes. in virginia, i met a 13-year-old boy named joshua davis. he and his dad both have type 1 diabetes, which means they need insulin every day. insulin costs about $10 a vial to make. but drug companies charge families like joshua and his dad up to 30 times more. i spoke with joshua’s mom. imagine what it’s like to look at your child who needs insulin and have no idea how you’re going to pay for it. what it does to your dignity, your ability to look your child in the eye, to be the parent you expect to be. joshua is here with us tonight. yesterday was his birthday. happy birthday, buddy. for joshua, and for the 200,000 other young people with type 1 diabetes, let’s cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month so everyone can afford it. drug companies will still do very well. and while we’re at it let medicare negotiate lower prices for prescription drugs, like the va already does. look, the american rescue plan is helping millions of families on affordable care act plans save $2,400 a year on their health care premiums. let’s close the coverage gap and make those savings permanent. second—cut energy costs for families an average of $500 a year by combatting climate change. let’s provide investments and tax credits to weatherize your homes and businesses to be energy efficient and you get a tax credit; double america’s clean energy production in solar, wind, and so much more; lower the price of electric vehicles, saving you another $80 a month because you’ll never have to pay at the gas pump again. third—cut the cost of child care. many families pay up to $14,000 a year for child care per child. middle-class and working families shouldn’t have to pay more than 7 percent of their income for care of young children. my plan will cut the cost in half for most families and help parents, including millions of women, who left the workforce during the pandemic because they couldn’t afford child care, to be able to get back to work. my plan doesn’t stop there. it also includes home and long-term care. more affordable housing. and pre-k for every 3- and 4-year-old. all of these will lower costs. and under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in new taxes. nobody. the one thing all americans agree on is that the tax system is not fair. we have to fix it. i’m not looking to punish anyone. but let’s make sure corporations and the wealthiest americans start paying their fair share. just last year, 55 fortune 500 corporations earned $40 billion in profits and paid zero dollars in federal income tax. that’s simply not fair. that’s why i’ve proposed a 15-percent minimum tax rate for corporations. we got more than 130 countries to agree on a global minimum tax rate so companies can’t get out of paying their taxes at home by shipping jobs and factories overseas. that’s why i’ve proposed closing loopholes so the very wealthy don’t pay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a firefighter. so that’s my plan. it will grow the economy and lower costs for families. so what are we waiting for? let’s get this done. and while you’re at it, confirm my nominees to the federal reserve, which plays a critical role in fighting inflation. my plan will not only lower costs to give families a fair shot, it will lower the deficit. the previous administration not only ballooned the deficit with tax cuts for the very wealthy and corporations, it undermined the watchdogs whose job was to keep pandemic relief funds from being wasted. but in my administration, the watchdogs have been welcomed back. we’re going after the criminals who stole billions in relief money meant for small businesses and millions of americans. and tonight, i’m announcing that the justice department will name a chief prosecutor for pandemic fraud. by the end of this year, the deficit will be down to less than half what it was before i took office. the only president ever to cut the deficit by more than one trillion dollars in a single year. lowering your costs also means demanding more competition. i’m a capitalist, but capitalism without competition isn’t capitalism. it’s exploitation—and it drives up prices. when corporations don’t have to compete, their profits go up, your prices go up, and small businesses and family farmers and ranchers go under. we see it happening with ocean carriers moving goods in and out of america. during the pandemic, these foreign-owned companies raised prices by as much as 1,000 percent and made record profits. tonight, i’m announcing a crackdown on these companies overcharging american businesses and consumers. and as wall street firms take over more nursing homes, quality in those homes has gone down and costs have gone up. that ends on my watch. medicare is going to set higher standards for nursing homes and make sure your loved ones get the care they deserve and expect. we’ll also cut costs and keep the economy going strong by giving workers a fair shot, provide more training and apprenticeships, hire them based on their skills not degrees. let’s pass the paycheck fairness act and paid leave. raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour and extend the child tax credit, so no one has to raise a family in poverty. let’s increase pell grants and increase our historic support of hbcus, and invest in what jill—our first lady who teaches full-time—calls america’s best-kept secret: community colleges. and let’s pass the pro act when a majority of workers want to form a union—they shouldn’t be stopped. when we invest in our workers, when we build the economy from the bottom up and the middle out together, we can do something we haven’t done in a long time: build a better america. for more than two years, covid-19 has impacted every decision in our lives and the life of the nation. and i know you’re tired, frustrated, and exhausted. but i also know this. because of the progress we’ve made, because of your resilience and the tools we have, tonight i can say we are moving forward safely, back to more normal routines. we’ve reached a new moment in the fight against covid-19, with severe cases down to a level not seen since last july. just a few days ago, the centers for disease control and prevention—the cdc—issued new mask guidelines. under these new guidelines, most americans in most of the country can now be mask free. and based on the projections, more of the country will reach that point across the next couple of weeks. thanks to the progress we have made this past year, covid-19 need no longer control our lives. i know some are talking about “living with covid-19.” tonight i say that we will never just accept living with covid-19. we will continue to combat the virus as we do other diseases. and because this is a virus that mutates and spreads, we will stay on guard. here are four common sense steps as we move forward safely. first, stay protected with vaccines and treatments. we know how incredibly effective vaccines are. if you’re vaccinated and boosted, you have the highest degree of protection. we will never give up on vaccinating more americans. now, i know parents with kids under 5 are eager to see a vaccine authorized for their children. the scientists are working hard to get that done and we’ll be ready with plenty of vaccines when they do. we’re also ready with anti-viral treatments. if you get covid-19, the pfizer pill reduces your chances of ending up in the hospital by 90 percent. we’ve ordered more of these pills than anyone in the world. and pfizer is working overtime to get us 1 million pills this month and more than double that next month. and we’re launching the “test to treat” initiative so people can get tested at a pharmacy, and if they’re positive, receive antiviral pills on the spot at no cost. if you’re immunocompromised or have some other vulnerability, we have treatments and free high-quality masks. we’re leaving no one behind or ignoring anyone’s needs as we move forward. and on testing, we have made hundreds of millions of tests available for you to order for free. even if you already ordered free tests tonight, i am announcing that you can order more from covidtests.gov starting next week. second—we must prepare for new variants. over the past year, we’ve gotten much better at detecting new variants. if necessary, we’ll be able to deploy new vaccines within 100 days instead of many more months or years. and, if congress provides the funds we need, we’ll have new stockpiles of tests, masks, and pills ready if needed. i cannot promise a new variant won’t come. but i can promise you we’ll do everything within our power to be ready if it does. third—we can end the shutdown of schools and businesses. we have the tools we need. it’s time for americans to get back to work and fill our great downtowns again. people working from home can feel safe to begin to return to the office. we’re doing that here in the federal government. the vast majority of federal workers will once again work in person. our schools are open. let’s keep it that way. our kids need to be in school. and with 75 percent of adult americans fully vaccinated and hospitalizations down by 77 percent, most americans can remove their masks, return to work, stay in the classroom, and move forward safely. we achieved this because we provided free vaccines, treatments, tests, and masks. of course, continuing this costs money. i will soon send congress a request. the vast majority of americans have used these tools and may want to again, so i expect congress to pass it quickly. fourth, we will continue vaccinating the world. we’ve sent 475 million vaccine doses to 112 countries, more than any other nation. and we won’t stop. we have lost so much to covid-19. time with one another. and worst of all, so much loss of life. let’s use this moment to reset. let’s stop looking at covid-19 as a partisan dividing line and see it for what it is: a god-awful disease. let’s stop seeing each other as enemies, and start seeing each other for who we really are: fellow americans. we can’t change how divided we’ve been. but we can change how we move forward—on covid-19 and other issues we must face together. i recently visited the new york city police department days after the funerals of officer wilbert mora and his partner, officer jason rivera. they were responding to a 9-1-1 call when a man shot and killed them with a stolen gun. officer mora was 27 years old. officer rivera was 22. both dominican americans who’d grown up on the same streets they later chose to patrol as police officers. i spoke with their families and told them that we are forever in debt for their sacrifice, and we will carry on their mission to restore the trust and safety every community deserves. i’ve worked on these issues a long time. i know what works: investing in crime prevention and community police officers who’ll walk the beat, who’ll know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety. so let’s not abandon our streets. or choose between safety and equal justice. let’s come together to protect our communities, restore trust, and hold law enforcement accountable. that’s why the justice department required body cameras, banned chokeholds, and restricted no-knock warrants for its officers. that’s why the american rescue plan provided $350 billion that cities, states, and counties can use to hire more police and invest in proven strategies like community violence interruption—trusted messengers breaking the cycle of violence and trauma and giving young people hope. we should all agree: the answer is not to defund the police. the answer is to fund the police with the resources and training they need to protect our communities. i ask democrats and republicans alike: pass my budget and keep our neighborhoods safe. and i will keep doing everything in my power to crack down on gun trafficking and ghost guns you can buy online and make at home—they have no serial numbers and can’t be traced. and i ask congress to pass proven measures to reduce gun violence. pass universal background checks. why should anyone on a terrorist list be able to purchase a weapon? ban assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. repeal the liability shield that makes gun manufacturers the only industry in america that can’t be sued. these laws don’t infringe on the second amendment. they save lives. the most fundamental right in america is the right to vote—and to have it counted. and it’s under assault. in state after state, new laws have been passed, not only to suppress the vote, but to subvert entire elections. we cannot let this happen. tonight. i call on the senate to: pass the freedom to vote act. pass the john lewis voting rights act. and while you’re at it, pass the disclose act so americans can know who is funding our elections. tonight, i’d like to honor someone who has dedicated his life to serve this country: justice stephen breyer—an army veteran, constitutional scholar, and retiring justice of the united states supreme court. justice breyer, thank you for your service. one of the most serious constitutional responsibilities a president has is nominating someone to serve on the united states supreme court. and i did that 4 days ago, when i nominated circuit court of appeals judge ketanji brown jackson. one of our nation’s top legal minds, who will continue justice breyer’s legacy of excellence. a former top litigator in private practice. a former federal public defender. and from a family of public-school educators and police officers. a consensus builder. since she’s been nominated, she’s received a broad range of support—from the fraternal order of police to former judges appointed by democrats and republicans. and if we are to advance liberty and justice, we need to secure the border and fix the immigration system. we can do both. at our border, we’ve installed new technology like cutting-edge scanners to better detect drug smuggling. we’ve set up joint patrols with mexico and guatemala to catch more human traffickers. we’re putting in place dedicated immigration judges so families fleeing persecution and violence can have their cases heard faster. we’re securing commitments and supporting partners in south and central america to host more refugees and secure their own borders. we can do all this while keeping lit the torch of liberty that has led generations of immigrants to this land—my forefathers and so many of yours. provide a pathway to citizenship for dreamers, those on temporary status, farm workers, and essential workers. revise our laws so businesses have the workers they need and families don’t wait decades to reunite. it’s not only the right thing to do—it’s the economically smart thing to do. that’s why immigration reform is supported by everyone from labor unions to religious leaders to the us chamber of commerce. let’s get it done once and for all. advancing liberty and justice also requires protecting the rights of women. the constitutional right affirmed in roe v. wade—standing precedent for half a century—is under attack as never before. if we want to go forward—not backward—we must protect access to health care. preserve a woman’s right to choose. and let’s continue to advance maternal health care in america. and for our lgbtq+ americans, let’s finally get the bipartisan equality act to my desk. the onslaught of state laws targeting transgender americans and their families is wrong. as i said last year, especially to our younger transgender americans, i will always have your back as your president, so you can be yourself and reach your god-given potential. while it often appears that we never agree, that isn’t true. i signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year. from preventing government shutdowns to protecting asian-americans from still-too-common hate crimes to reforming military justice. and soon, we’ll strengthen the violence against women act that i first wrote three decades ago. it is important for us to show the nation that we can come together and do big things. so tonight i’m offering a unity agenda for the nation. four big things we can do together. first, beat the opioid epidemic. there is so much we can do. increase funding for prevention, treatment, harm reduction, and recovery. get rid of outdated rules that stop doctors from prescribing treatments. and stop the flow of illicit drugs by working with state and local law enforcement to go after traffickers. if you’re suffering from addiction, know you are not alone. i believe in recovery, and i celebrate the 23 million americans in recovery. second, let’s take on mental health. especially among our children, whose lives and education have been turned upside down. the american rescue plan gave schools money to hire teachers and help students make up for lost learning. i urge every parent to make sure your school does just that. and we can all play a part—sign up to be a tutor or a mentor. children were also struggling before the pandemic. bullying, violence, trauma, and the harms of social media. as frances haugen, who is here with us tonight, has shown, we must hold social media platforms accountable for the national experiment they’re conducting on our children for profit. it’s time to strengthen privacy protections, ban targeted advertising to children, demand tech companies stop collecting personal data on our children. and let’s get all americans the mental health services they need. more people they can turn to for help, and full parity between physical and mental health care. third, support our veterans. veterans are the best of us. i’ve always believed that we have a sacred obligation to equip all those we send to war and care for them and their families when they come home. my administration is providing assistance with job training and housing, and now helping lower-income veterans get va care debt-free. our troops in iraq and afghanistan faced many dangers. one was stationed at bases and breathing in toxic smoke from “burn pits” that incinerated wastes of war—medical and hazard material, jet fuel, and more. when they came home, many of the world’s fittest and best trained warriors were never the same. headaches. numbness. dizziness. a cancer that would put them in a flag-draped coffin. i know. one of those soldiers was my son major beau biden. we don’t know for sure if a burn pit was the cause of his brain cancer, or the diseases of so many of our troops. but i’m committed to finding out everything we can. committed to military families like danielle robinson from ohio. the widow of sergeant first class heath robinson. he was born a soldier. army national guard. combat medic in kosovo and iraq. stationed near baghdad, just yards from burn pits the size of football fields. heath’s widow danielle is here with us tonight. they loved going to ohio state football games. he loved building legos with their daughter. but cancer from prolonged exposure to burn pits ravaged heath’s lungs and body. danielle says heath was a fighter to the very end. he didn’t know how to stop fighting, and neither did she. through her pain she found purpose to demand we do better. tonight, danielle—we are. the va is pioneering new ways of linking toxic exposures to diseases, already helping more veterans get benefits. and tonight, i’m announcing we’re expanding eligibility to veterans suffering from nine respiratory cancers. i’m also calling on congress: pass a law to make sure veterans devastated by toxic exposures in iraq and afghanistan finally get the benefits and comprehensive health care they deserve. and fourth, let’s end cancer as we know it. this is personal to me and jill, to kamala, and to so many of you. cancer is the #2 cause of death in america—second only to heart disease. last month, i announced our plan to supercharge the cancer moonshot that president obama asked me to lead six years ago. our goal is to cut the cancer death rate by at least 50 percent over the next 25 years, turn more cancers from death sentences into treatable diseases. more support for patients and families. to get there, i call on congress to fund arpa-h, the advanced research projects agency for health. it’s based on darpa—the defense department project that led to the internet, gps, and so much more. arpa-h will have a singular purpose—to drive breakthroughs in cancer, alzheimer’s, diabetes, and more. a unity agenda for the nation. we can do this. my fellow americans—tonight, we have gathered in a sacred space—the citadel of our democracy. in this capitol, generation after generation, americans have debated great questions amid great strife, and have done great things. we have fought for freedom, expanded liberty, defeated totalitarianism and terror. and built the strongest, freest, and most prosperous nation the world has ever known. now is the hour. our moment of responsibility. our test of resolve and conscience, of history itself. it is in this moment that our character is formed. our purpose is found. our future is forged. well, i know this nation. we will meet the test. to protect freedom and liberty, to expand fairness and opportunity. we will save democracy. as hard as these times have been, i am more optimistic about america today than i have been my whole life. because i see the future that is within our grasp. because i know there is simply nothing beyond our capacity. we are the only nation on earth that has always turned every crisis we have faced into an opportunity. the only nation that can be defined by a single word: possibilities. so on this night, in our 245th year as a nation, i have come to report on the state of the union. and my report is this: the state of the union is strong—because you, the american people, are strong. we are stronger today than we were a year ago. and we will be stronger a year from now than we are today. now is our moment to meet and overcome the challenges of our time. and we will, as one people. one america. the united states of america. may god bless you all. may god protect our troops. please, please sit down. thank you. thank you. good afternoon. before i take questions, i want to make — give you a progress report to the nation on where we stand 65 days into office here on vaccinations and a few other top priorities for the american people. first, on vaccinations: on december 8th, i indicated that i hoped to get 100 million shots in people’s arms in my first 100 days. we met that goal last week by day 58 — 42 days ahead of schedule. now, today, i’m setting a second goal, and that is: we will, by my 100th day in office, have administered 200 million shots in people’s arms. that’s right: 200 million shots in 100 days. i know it’s ambitious, twice our original goal, but no other country in the world has even come close — not even close — to what we are doing. and i believe we can do it. and today, we’ve made a historic investment in reaching the hardest-hit and the most vulnerable communities, the highest-risk communities — as a consequence of the virus — by investing an addition $10 billion in being able to reach them. i also set a goal, before i took office, of getting a majority of schools in k through 8 fully open in the first 100 days. now, thanks to the enormous amount of work done by our administration, educators, parents, local, state education officials and leaders — a recent department of education department survey shows that nearly half of the k-through-8 schools are open now full time, five days a week, for in-person learning. not yet a majority, but we’re really close. and i believe, in the 35 days left to go, we’ll meet that goal as well. as of yesterday, more than 100 million payments of $1,400 have gone into people’s bank accounts. that’s real money in people’s pockets, bringing relief instantly, almost. and millions more will be getting their money very soon. one final note: since we passed the american rescue plan, we’re starting to see new signs of hope in our economy. since it was passed, a majority — a majority of economic forecasters have significantly increased their projections on the economic growth that’s going to take place this year. they’re now projecting it will exceed 6 percent — a 6 percent growth in gdp. and just this morning, we learned that the number of people filing for weekly unemployment insurance fell by nearly 100,000 persons. that’s the first time in a year the number has fallen below the pre-pandemic high. so there are still too many americans out of work, too many families hurting, and we still have a lot of work to do. but i can say to you, the american people: help is here, and hope is on the way. now i’ll be happy to take your questions. zeke, the associated press. q thank you, mr. president. you mentioned your progress on covid-19. i’d like to ask you about some of the other issues facing your presidency. one of the defining challenges you face in the coming months is how to deliver on your promise to americans on issues like immigration reform, gun control, voting rights, climate change. all of those right now are facing stiff, united opposition from republicans on capitol hill. how far are you willing to go to achieve those promises that you made to the american people? well, i’m going to — look, when i took office, i decided that it was a fairly basic, simple proposition, and that is: i got elected to solve problems. and the most urgent problem facing the american people, i stated from the outset, was covid-19 and the economic dislocation for millions and millions of americans. and so that’s why i put all my focus in the beginning — there are a lot of problems — put all my focus on dealing with those particular problems. and the other problems we’re talking about, from immigration to guns and the other things you mentioned, are long-term problems; they’ve been around a long time. and what we’re going to be able to do, god willing, is now begin, one at a time, to focus on those as well, and — whether it’s immigration or guns or a number of other problems that face the country. but the fundamental problem is getting people some peace of mind so they can go to bed at night and not stare at the ceiling wondering whether they lost their health insurance, whether they’re going to lose a family member, whether they’re going to be in a position where they’re not going to be — they’re going to lose their home because they can’t pay their mortgage, or that millions of people are going to get thrown out of their homes because of the inability to — to pay their rent. so we’re going to move on these one at a time, try to do as many simultaneously as we can. but that’s the reason why i focused as i have. and here’s the deal: i think my republican colleagues are going to have to determine whether or not we want to work together, or they decide that the way in which they want to proceed is to — is to just decide to divide the country, continue the politics of division. but i’m not going to do that; i’m just going to move forward and take these things as they come. q and just to — to follow up, mr. president, can your presidency be a success if you can’t make progress on those four challenges: climate change, immigration reform, gun control, voting rights? well, i plan on making progress on all of them, but that’s going to be for the american people to decide. i think — you know, i doubt whether — maybe you did; maybe others did. i thought — many of you thought there was no possibility of my getting the plan i got passed, passed, without any republican votes. a pretty big deal. it got passed. growing the economy. people’s lives are changing. so let’s see what happens. all i know, i’ve been hired to solve problems — to solve problems, not create division. okay. how about yamiche? q thanks so much, mr. president. you’ve said over and over again that immigrants shouldn’t come to this country right now; this isn’t the time to come. that message is not being received. instead, the perception of you that got you elected — as a moral, decent man — is the reason why a lot of immigrants are coming to this country and entrusting you with unaccompanied minors. how do you resolve that tension? and how are you choosing which families can stay and which can go, given the fact that even though, with title 42, there are some families that are staying? and is there a timeline for when we won’t be seeing these overcrowded facilities with — run by cpb [sic], when it comes to unaccompanied minors? well, look, i guess i should be flattered people are coming because i’m the nice guy; that’s the reason why it’s happening — that i’m a decent man or however it’s phrased. that — you know, that’s why they’re coming, because they know biden is a good guy. the truth of the matter is: nothing has changed. as many people came — 28 percent increase in children to the border in my administration; 31 percent in the last year of — in 2019, before the pandemic, in the trump administration. it happens every single, solitary year: there is a significant increase in the number of people coming to the border in the winter months of january, february, march. that happens every year. in addition to that, there is a — and nobody — and, by the way, does anybody suggest that there was a 31 percent increase under trump because he was a nice guy and he was doing good things at the border? that’s not the reason they’re coming. the reason they’re coming is that it’s the time they can travel with the least likelihood of dying on the way because of the heat in the desert, number one. number two, they’re coming because of the circumstances in-country — in-country. the way to deal with this problem — and i started to deal with it back when i was a united states senator — i mean, vice president — putting together a bipartisan plan of over $700 million to deal with the root causes of why people are leaving. what did trump do? he eliminated that funding. he didn’t use it. he didn’t do it. and in addition to that, what he did — he dismantled all the elements that exist to deal with what had been a problem and — and has been — continued to be a problem for a long time. he, in fact, shut down the — the number of beds available. he did not fund hhs to get people to get the children out of those — those border patrol facilities where they should not be and not supposed to be more than a few days — a little while. but he dismantled all of that. and so what we’re doing now is attempting to rebuild — rebuild the system that can accommodate the — what is happening today. and i like to think it’s because i’m a nice guy, but it’s not. it’s because of what’s happened every year. let me say one other thing on this. if you take a look at the number of people who are coming, the vast majority, the overwhelming majority of people coming to the border and crossing are being sent back — are being sent back. thousands — tens of thousands of people who are — who are over 18 years of age and single — people, one at a time coming, have been sent back, sent home. we’re sending back the vast majority of the families that are coming. we’re trying to work out now, with mexico, their willingness to take more of those families back. but we — that’s what’s happening. they’re not getting across the border. and those who are coming across the border, who are unaccompanied children, we’re moving rapidly to try to put in place what was dismantled, as i said. for example, of all the children who are coming across the border, over 70 percent are either 16 or 17 years old. we’re not talking about people ripping babies from mothers’ arms or little three-year-olds standing on the border. less than — i think it’s one and a half percent fall in the category of the very young. so what we’re doing is we’re providing for the space, again, to be able to get these kids out of the border patrol facilities, which no child — no one should be in any longer than 72 hours. and today, i went to — for example, i used all the resources available to me, went to the defense department, and — and the secretary of defense has just made available fort bliss — 5,000 beds be made easily available. five thousand beds on the texas border. so we’re building back up the capacity that should have been maintained and built upon that trump dismantled. it’s going to take time. and the other thing we’re doing, i might add — am i giving you too long an answer? because if you don’t want the details — q (inaudible.) no, no, but i mean — i don’t know how much detail you want about immigration. maybe i’ll stop there and fin- — q my follow-up question is: one, if you could talk a little bit about which families — why they’re being allowed to stay. the families that are being allowed to stay, why they’re being allowed to stay. and in addition to that, when it comes to the filibuster, which is what zeke was asking about, there’s — immigration is a big issue, of course, when it — related to the filibuster, but there’s also republicans who are passing bill after bill, trying to restrict voting rights. chuck schumer is calling it an “existential threat” to democracy. why not back a filibuster rule that at least gets around issues including voting rights or immigration? jim clyburn, someone who — of course, who you know very well, has backed the idea of a filibuster rule when it comes to civil rights and voting rights. well, look, i’m going to deal with all of those problems. the question is, the priorities as they come and land on my plate. let’s go to the first question you asked — the first of the second question you asked. and that is: what about dealing with families? why are not — some not going back? because mexico is refusing to take them back. they’re saying they won’t take them back — not all of them. we’re in negotiations with the president of mexico. i think we’re going to see that change. they should all be going back, all be going back. the only people we’re not going to let sitting there on the other side of the rio grande by themselves with no help are children. and what we’re doing there, and it’s an important point to understand — i know you understand; i don’t mean to say it that way — an important point to focus on: the vast majority of people under the age of 18 coming to united states come with a telephone number on a wristband or come with a telephone number in their pocket in the united states — a mother, a father, a close relative, a grandmom or a grandpop. what was happening before is it was taking literally weeks and weeks, and maybe even months, before anybody would pick up the phone and call to see if there really was someone there. well, we’ve set up a system now where, within 24 hours, there’s a phone call made as that person or that child crosses the border. and then a verification system is being put in place as of today to determine quickly whether or not that is a trafficker being called or that is actually a mom, a dad, and/or a close relative. they’re establishing that right off the bat. if it, in fact, is mom or dad, dad says — to take the extreme case — “i got a birth certificate.” then guess what? we’re getting that kid directly to that parent immediately. and so that’s going to reduce significantly — there’s two ways to reduce child populations in circumstances that are not acceptable, like being held at a border patrol station. one is to get them to the place where they have a relative and set a date as to when a hearing can be held. the second way to do it is put them in a health and human services facility that we’re occupying now — both licensed beds around the country that exist, as well as, for example, federal resources like fort bliss — to get them safely in a place where they can be taken care of while their fate is determined. q and can you answer the filibuster (inaudible)? filibuster. filibuster. you know, with regard to the filibuster, i believe we should go back to a position on the filibuster that existed just when i came to the united states senate 120 years ago. and that is that — it used to be required for the filibuster — and i had a card on this; i was going to give you the statistics, but you probably know them — that it used to be that, that from between 1917 to 1971 — the filibuster existed — there was a total of 58 motions to break a filibuster that whole time. last year alone, there were five times that many. so it’s being abused in a gigantic way. and, for example, it used to be you had to stand there and talk and talk and talk and talk until you collapsed. and guess what? people got tired of talking and tired of collapsing. filibusters broke down, and we were able to break the filibuster, get a quorum, and vote. so i strongly support moving in that direction, in addition to having an open mind about dealing with certain things that are — are just elemental to the functioning of our democracy, like the right to vote — like the basic right to vote. we’ve amended the filibuster in the past. but here’s the deal: as you observed, i’m a fairly practical guy. i want to get things done. i want to get them done, consistent with what we promised the american people. and in order to do that in a 50-50 senate, we’ve got to get to the place where i get 50 votes so that the vice president of the united states can break the tie, or i get 51 votes without her. and so, i’m going to say something outrageous: i have never been particularly poor at calculating how to get things done in the united states senate. so the best way to get something done, if you — if you hold near and dear to you that you like to be able to — anyway — i — we’re going to get a lot done. and if we have to — if there’s complete lockdown and chaos as a consequence of the filibuster, then we’ll have to go beyond what i’m talking about. okay. hang on. sorry. oh, seung min — ms. kim. q thank you, mr. president, to follow up on the filibuster: so do you believe it should take 60 votes to end a filibuster on legislation or 51? (laughs.) if we could end it with 51, we would have no problem. you’re going to have to — the existing rule — it’s going to be hard to get a parliamentary ruling that allows 50 votes to end the filibuster, the existence of a filibuster. but it’s not my expertise, in what the parliamentary rules and how to get there are. but our preoccupation with the filibuster is totally legitimate, but in the meantime, we got a lot we can do while we’re talking about what we’re going to do about the filibuster. let me get here. okay, cecilia vega. q i’d like to circle back to immigration, please. you just listed the reasons that people are coming, talking about in-country problems, saying that it happens every year; you blamed the last administration. sir, i just got back last night from a reporting trip to the border where i met nine-year-old, yossell, who walked here from honduras by himself, along with another little boy. he had that phone number on him — astounding. q — and we were able to call his family. his mother says that she sent her son to this country because she believes that you are not deporting unaccompanied minors like her son. that’s why she sent him alone from honduras. so, sir, you blamed the last administration, but is your messaging — in saying that these children are and will be allowed to stay in this country and work their way through this process — encouraging families like yossell says to come? well, look, the idea that i’m going to say — which i would never do — “if an unaccompanied child ends up at the border, we’re just going to let him starve to death and stay on the other side” — no previous administration did that either, except trump. i’m not going to do it. i’m not going to do it. that’s why i’ve asked the vice president of the united states, yesterday, to be the lead person on dealing with focusing on the fundamental reasons why people leave honduras, guatemala, and el salvador in the first place. it’s because of earthquakes, floods. it’s because of lack of food. it’s because of gang violence. it’s because of a whole range of things. that — when i was vice president and had the same obligation to deal with unaccompanied children, i was able to get it slowed up significantly by working with the heads of state of those communities to do things like — in one of the major cities, the reason people were leaving is they couldn’t walk in the street because they were getting — their kids were getting beat up or shot or in gang violence. well, what i was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but i was able to say, “okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? i’ll put the lighting in.” we got a contractor. we got the type of lighting. we paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the government. and violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. fewer people sought to leave. when this hurricane occurred — two hurricanes — instead of us going down and helping in a major way, so that people would not have reason to want to leave in the first place because they didn’t have housing or water or sustenance, we did nothing. we’re going to do a lot in our administration. we’re going to be spending that 700-plus million dollars a year to change the life and circumstances of why people leave in the first place. that mother did not sit around with — on the kitchen table and say, “you know, i got a great idea: the way i’m going to make sure my son get taken care of is i’m going to put a…” — how old was he, or she? q he’s — he’s nine. i also met a 10-year-old. a nine-year-old. “i’m going to send him on a thousand-mile journey across the desert and up to the united states because i know joe biden is a nice guy and he’ll take care of him.” what a desperate act to have to take. the circumstances must be horrible. so we can do something about that. that’s what the vice president is going to be doing: what i did. when president obama asked me to come and deal, i was in — i was in turkey at the time, and he said, “you got to come home and take care of this.” so we put together a plan and it had an impact. and so, the question here is whether — how we go ahead and do this; what we do. there’s no easy answer q a quick follow, if i may. do you want to see these unaccompanied minors staying in this country, or should they be deported eventually? well, the judgment has to be made whether or not — and in this young man’s case, he has a mom at home; there’s an overwhelming reason why he’d be put in a plane and flown back to his mom. q final follow, sir. you mentioned circumstances that must be horrific. the customs and border protection facility in donna, texas — i was there — is at 1,556 percent capacity — yep. q — right now, with mostly unaccompanied minors. there are kids that are sleeping on floors. they are packed into these pods. i’ve spoken to lawyers who say that they — some of these children have not seen the sun in days. what’s your reaction — what is your reaction to these images that have come out from that particular facility? is what’s happening inside acceptable to you? and when is this going to be fixed? is — that’s a serious question, right? is it acceptable to me? come on. that’s why we’re going to be moving a thousand of those kids out quickly. that’s why i got fort bliss opened up. that’s why i’ve been working from the moment this started to happen to try to find additional access for children to be able to safely — not just children, but particularly children — to be able to safely be housed while we follow through on the rest of what’s happening. that is totally unacceptable. ken. q thank you, mr. president. i wanted to ask you about afghanistan. you face a may 1st deadline for the withdrawal of u.s. troops from that country. as a candidate, in foreign affairs, you wrote that it is past time to end these forever wars. can you commit to the american people that by may 2nd the u.s. will no longer have forces in afghanistan? the answer is that it’s going to be hard to meet the may 1 deadline. just in terms of tactical reasons, it’s hard to get those troops out. so, what we’ve been doing — what i’ve been doing and what secretary blinken has been doing — has been — we’ve been meeting with our allies, those other nations that have nato allies who have troops in afghanistan as well. and if we leave, we’re going to do so in a safe and orderly way. we’re in consultation, i said, with our allies and partners in how to proceed. and secretary blinken is meeting in brussels this week with our nato allies, particularly those who have forces there. and general austin is — just met with ghani and i’m waiting for the briefing on that. he is the — the “leader,” quote, in afghanistan and kabul. and there’s a u.n.-led process that’s beginning shortly on how to mechanically get people — how to end this war. but it is not my intention to stay there for a long time. but the question is: how and in what circumstances do we meet that agreement that was made by president trump to leave under a deal that looks like it’s not being able to be worked out to begin with? how is that done? but we are not staying a long time. q you just said “if we leave.” do you think it’s possible that we– we will leave. the question is when we leave. q do you — sorry — do you believe, though, it’s possible we could have troops there next year? i — i can’t picture that being the case. okay. kristen. q thank you very much, mr. president. given the conditions that were just laid out at the migrant facilities at the u.s. border, will you commit to allowing journalists to have access to the facilities that are overcrowded moving forward? i will commit when my plan, very shortly, is underway to let you have access to not just them, but to other facilities as well. q how soon will journalists be able to have access to the facilities? we’ve obviously been allowed to be inside one, but we haven’t seen the facilities in which children are packed together to really give the american people a chance to see that. will you commit to transparency on this issue, mr. president? i will commit to transparency, and — as soon as i am in a position to be able to implement what we are doing right now. and one of the reasons i haven’t gone down — i have all my — my chief folks have gone down — is i don’t want to become the issue. i don’t want to be, you know, bringing all of the secret service and everybody with me to get in the way. so this is being set up, and you’ll have full access to everything once we get this thing moving. q okay. and just to be clear: how soon will that be, mr. president? i don’t know, to be clear. q okay. and do you bear responsibility for everything that’s happening at the border now? i hear you talking a lot about the past administration. you decided to roll back some of those policies, did you move too quickly to roll back (inaudible) policies? to roll back what? i’m sorry. q did you move too quickly to roll back some of the executive orders of your predecessor? first of all, all the policies that were underway were not helping at all — did not slow up the amount of immigration — and there’s many people coming. and rolling back the policies of separating children from — from their mothers, i make no apology for that. rolling back the policies of “remain in mexico,” sitting on the edge of the rio grande in a muddy circumstance with not enough to eat and — i make no apologies for that. i make no apologies for ending programs that did not exist before trump became president that have an incredibly negative impact on the law, international law, as well as on human dignity. and so, i make no apologies for that. q if i could just ask you about foreign policy, mr. president. overnight, we learned that north korea tested two ballistic missiles. what, if any, actions will you take? and what is your red line on north korea? let me say that, number one, u.n. resolution 1718 was violated by those particular missiles that were tested — number one. we’re consulting with our allies and partners. and there will be responses — if they choose to escalate, we will respond accordingly. but i’m also prepared for some form of diplomacy, but it has to be conditioned upon the end result of denuclearization. so that’s what we’re doing right now: consulting with our allies. q just a very quick follow-up — you’ve only got another hour now, okay? q diplomacy: can you define what you mean? and former president obama warned the incoming president trump that north korea was the top foreign policy issue that he was watching. is that how you assess the crisis in north korea? yes. okay. hang on a second here, kristen. nancy, cbs. q thank you very much, mr. president. i want to go back to voting rights. and as yamiche mentioned, republican legislatures across the country are working to pass bills that would restrict voting, particularly, democrats fear, impacting minority voters and young voters — the very people who helped to get you elected in november. are you worried that if you don’t manage to pass voting rights legislation that your party is going to lose seats and possibly lose control of the house and the senate in 2022? what i’m worried about is how un-american this whole initiative is. it’s sick. it’s sick. deciding in some states that you cannot bring water to people standing in line, waiting to vote; deciding that you’re going to end voting at five o’clock when working people are just getting off work; deciding that there will be no absentee ballots under the most rigid circumstances. it’s all designed — and i’m going to spend my time doing three things: one, trying to figure out how to pass the legislation passed by the house, number one. number two, educating the american public. the republican voters i know find this despicable. republican voters, the folks out in — outside this white house. i’m not talking about the elected officials; i’m talking about voters. voters. and so i am convinced that we’ll be able to stop this because it is the most pernicious thing. this makes jim crow look like jim eagle. i mean, this is gigantic what they’re trying to do, and it cannot be sustained. i’m going to do everything in my power, along with my friends in the house and the senate, to keep that from — from becoming the law. q is there anything else you can do about it besides passing legislation? the answer is “yes,” but i’m not going to lay out a strategy in front of the whole world and you now. q and then, on a related note, have you decided whether you are going to run for reelection in 2024? you haven’t set up a reelection campaign yet, as your predecessor had by this time. (laughs.) my predecessor need do [sic] — needed to. my predecessor. oh god, i miss him. q have you — have you — no, the answer is “yes.” my plan is to run for reelection. that’s my expectation. q and then, on — on one other note, on bipartisanship: your old friend, mitch mcconnell, says you have only spoken to each other once since you took office and that you have moved far left since taking office. do you see it the same way he does? have you rejected bipartisanship? no, i haven’t at all. i’ve been meeting — when is the last time a president invited the opposite party down at least a half a dozen times to talk about issues? everything from how we work — we’re working with a group of 20 members of the senate right now and house on how we reestablish our ability to make computer chips and how we get ahead of the game, how we can work together. and we’re working together on a bunch of things. but, look, i know mitch well; mitch knows me well. i would expect mitch to say exactly what he said. but this is a matter of making sure that — i would like republican — elected republican support, but what i know i have now is that i have electoral support from republican voters. republican voters agree with what i’m doing. and so, unless mitch says the last thing i did is — the last piece of legislation is so far left — well, then he ought to a look at his party. over 50 percent of them must be over that edge as well because they support what i did. okay. where am i here? let me see. kaitlan. q thank you very much, mr. president. i have a question for you, but first i’d like to follow up on a question from yamiche, and that’s on the filibuster. that counts as a question, but go ahead. q okay. i’ll make it quick. it’s a quick question. no, no — you can. q regarding the filibuster: at john lewis’s funeral, president barack obama said he believed the filibuster was a “relic” of the jim crow era. do you agree? yes. q and if not, why not abolish it if it’s a relic of the jim crow era? successful electoral politics is the art of the possible. let’s figure out how we can get this done and move in the direction of significantly changing the abuse of even the filibuster rule first. it’s been abused from the time it came into being — by an extreme way in the last 20 years. let’s deal with the abuse first. q it sounds like you’re moving closer to eliminating the filibuster. is that correct? i answered your question. q you also just made some news by saying that you are going to run for reelection. i said, “that is my expectation.” q so is that a “yes” that you are running for reelection? look, i — i don’t know where you guys come from, man. i’ve never been able to travel. i’m a great respecter of fate. i’ve never been able to plan four and half, three and a half years ahead for certain. q and if you do — it — q if you do run, will vice president harris be on your ticket? i would fully expect that to be the case. she’s doing a great job. she’s a great partner. she’s a great partner. q and do you believe you’ll be running against former president trump? oh, come on. i don’t even think about — i don’t — i have no idea. i have no idea if there will be a republican party. do you? i know you don’t have to answer my question, but, i mean, you know, do you? i mean, look, this is — the way i view things — i’ve become a great respecter of fate in my life. i set a goal that’s in front of me to get things done for the people i care most about, which are hardworking, decent american people who are getting — really having it stuck to them. i want to change the paradigm. i want to change the paradigm. we start to reward work, not just wealth. i want to change the paradigm. if you notice — don’t you find it kind of interesting that my republican friends were worried about that the cost and the taxes that had to be had — if there is any tax to be had, as they talk about it — in dealing with the — the act that we just passed which puts money in people’s pockets — ordinary people. did you hear them complain when they passed close to a $2 trillion trump tax cut — 83 percent going to the top 1 percent? did you hear them talk about that all? i love the fact that they’ve found this whole idea of concern about the federal budget. it’s kind of amazing. when the federal budget is saving people’s lives, they don’t think it’s such a good idea. when the federal budget is feathering the nest of the wealthiest americans — 90 of the fortune 500 companies making billions of dollars not paying a cent in taxes; reducing taxes to the point that people who are making — you know, if you’re a husband and wife, a schoolteacher and a cop, you’re paying at a higher rate than the average person making a billion dollars a year is — something is wrong. their newfound concern. i’m concerned — look, i meant what i said when i ran. and a lot of you still think i’m wrong, and i respect that. i said, “i’m running for three reasons: to restore the soul, dignity, honor, honesty, transparency to the american political system; two, to rebuild the backbone of this country — the middle class, hardworking people, and people struggling to get in the middle class. they built america, and unions built them.” the third reason i said i was running was to unite the country. and, generically speaking, all of you said, “no, you can’t do that.” well, i’ve not been able to unite the congress, but i’ve been uniting the country, based on the polling data. we have to come together. we have to. so, from my perspective, you know, it’s a — to me, it’s about just, you know, getting out there, putting one foot in front of the other and just trying to make things better for people — just hardworking people. people get up every morning and just want to figure out how to put food on the table for their kids, to be able have a little bit of breathing room, being able to have — make sure that they go to bed not staring at the ceiling, like my dad, wondering whether — since he didn’t have health insurance, what happens if mom gets sick or he got sick. these are basic things. basic things. and i’m of the view that the vast majority of people, including registered republicans, by and large, share that — that same — that same view, that same sense of what is — you know, what’s appropriate. justin. justin sink, bloomberg. q thanks, mr. president. i wanted to ask about your relationship with china now that you’ve been in office for a couple months. there’s obviously the meeting in alaska that was a little theatrical, and there’s the continued human rights abuses. so, today, i’m wondering: are you more likely than you were when you came into office to maintain tariffs on china? are you considering banning imports of forced-labor products? and would you consider cutting off u.s. investment or chinese access to international payment systems? well, look, they’re each specifically legitimate questions, but they only touch a smidgen of what the relationship with china really is about. i’ve known xi jinping for a long time. allegedly, by the time i left office as vice president, i had spent more time with xi jinping than any world leader had, because president obama and the chinese president hu decided we should get to know one another since it was inappropriate for the president of the united states to spend time with the vice president of another country. but it was obvious he was going to become the new leader of china. so, i spent hours upon hours with him alone with an interpreter — my interpreter and his — going into great detail. he is very, very straightforward. doesn’t have a democratic — with a small “d” — bone in his body. but he’s a smart, smart guy. he’s one of the guys, like putin, who thinks that autocracy is the wave of the future and democracy can’t function in an ever — an ever-complex world. so, when i was elected and he called to congratulate me, i think to the surprise of the china experts who were — his people were on call as well as mine, listening — we had a two-hour conversation. for two hours. and we made several things clear to one another. i made it clear to him again what i’ve told him in person on several occasions: that we’re not looking for confrontation, although we know there will be steep, steep competition. two, that we’ll have strong competition but we’ll insist that china play by the international rules: fair competition, fair practices, fair trade. thirdly, in order to compete effectively, i indicated that we’re going to deal with china effectively, and we’re going to need three things to do that. i tell him, our people. first, we’re going to invest in american workers and american science. i said that all through the campaign and i say it again. and we’re — and i’m setting up my administration to be able to do that, which is that, you know, back in the ‘60s, we used to invest a little over 2 percent of our entire gdp in pure research and investment in science. today, it’s 0.7 percent. i’m going to change that. we’re going to change that. the future lies in who can, in fact, own the future as it relates to technology, quantum computing, a whole range of things, including in medical fields. and so what i’m going to do is make sure we invest closer to 2 percent. one of the reasons why i’ve set up the — the pab [pcast] — the president’s board with scientists and the like, again — is we’re going to invest in medical research — cancer, alzheimer’s, diabetes, the things — industries of the future — artificial intelligence, quantum computing, biotech. and we’re going to make real investments. china is out investing us by a longshot, because their plan is to own that future. the third — the second thing we’re going to do is we’re going to reestablish our alliances. and i’ve been very clear with him, it’s not anti-chinese. and we’ve talked about it. i want to make sure that, for example, later today, after this — as a matter of fact, shortly after this, which is fine; we’ve been going close to an hour. i’m happy to go longer. but one of the things that i’m going to be doing, i’m going to be speaking with the 27 heads of state in europe and very shortly — i think within the next hour or so. i don’t know the exact time. and earlier this month — and apparently it got the chinese’s attention; that’s not why i did it — i met with our allies and how we’re going to hold china accountable in the region: australia, india, japan, and the united states — the so-called quad. because we have to have democracies working together. before too long, i’m going to have — i’m going to invite an alliance of democracies to come here to discuss the future. and so we’re going to make it clear that in order to deal with these things, we are going to hold china accountable to follow the rules — to follow the rules — whether it relates to the south china sea or the north china sea, or their agreement made on taiwan, or a whole range of other things. and the third thing, and the thing that i admire about dealing with xi is he understands — he makes no pretense about not understanding what i’m saying any more than i do him — i pointed out to him: no leader can be sustained in his position or her position unless they represent the values of the country. and i said as — “and, mr. president, as i’ve told you before, americans value the notion of freedom. america values human rights. we don’t always live up to our expectations, but it’s a values system. we are founded on that principle. and as long as you and your country continues to so blatantly violate human rights, we’re going to continue, in an unrelenting way, to call to the attention of the world and make it clear — make it clear what’s happening.” and he understood that. i made it clear that no american president — at least one did — but no american president ever back down from speaking out of what’s happening to the uighurs, what’s happening in hong kong, what’s happening in-country. that’s who we are. the moment a president walks away from that, as the last one did, is the moment we begin to lose our legitimacy around the world. it’s who we are. so i see stiff competition with china. china has an overall goal, and i don’t criticize them for the goal, but they have an overall goal to become the leading country in the world, the wealthiest country in the world, and the most powerful country in the world. that’s not going to happen on my watch because the united states are going to continue to grow and expand. q all right. just to follow up on the meeting of democracies: is that where you expect, in a multilateral way, to make these decisions about sanctions? or — no, that’s not where i make the decision; that’s where i make sure we’re all on the same page. all on the same page. look, i predict to you, your children or grandchildren are going to be doing their doctoral thesis on the issue of who succeeded: autocracy or democracy? because that is what is at stake, not just with china. look around the world. we’re in the midst of a fourth industrial revolution of enormous consequence. will there be middle class? how will people adjust to these significant changes in science and technology and the environment? how will they do that? and are democracies equipped — because all the people get to speak — to compete? it is clear, absolutely clear — and most of the scholars i dealt with at penn agree with me around the country — that this is a battle between the utility of democracies in the 21st century and autocracies. if you notice, you don’t have russia talking about communism anymore. it’s about an autocracy. demand decisions made by a leader of a country — that’s what’s at stake here. we’ve got to prove democracy works. q and, mr. president, sorry, i know you haven’t had a chance to address the tragedies in georgia and colorado. you had said to stay tuned for actions that you might take on gun control. wondering if you’ve made a decision either about sending the manufacturer liability bill that you had promised on day one to capitol hill, or executive actions like going after ghost guns or giving money to cities and states to battle gun control. all the above. it’s a matter of timing. as you’ve all observed, successful presidents — better than me — have been successful, in large part, because they know how to time what they’re doing — order it, decide and prioritize what needs to be done. the next major initiative is — and i’ll be announcing it friday in pittsburgh, in detail — is to rebuild the infrastructure — both physical and technological infrastructure in this country — so that we can compete and create significant numbers of really good-paying jobs. really good-paying jobs. and some of you have been around long enough to know that used to be a great republican goal and initiative. i still think the majority of the american people don’t like the fact that we are now ranked, what, 85th in the world in infrastructure. i mean, look, the future rests on whether or not we have the best airports that are going to accommodate air travel, ports that you can get in and out of quickly, so businesses decide. some of you, if you were ever local reporters, and you found your governor or mayor trying to attract business to your community, what’s the first thing that businesses asked? “what’s the closest access to — access to an interstate highway? how far am i from a freight rail? is the water — is the water available? is there enough water available for me to conduct my business?” all the things that relate to infrastructure. we have somewhere — i asked the staff to write it down for me, and they did — not for this, but for a longer discussion. we have somewhere, in terms of infrastructure — we have — we rank 13th globally in infrastructure. china is investing three times more in infrastructure than the united states is. bridges: more than one third of our bridges — 231,000 of them — need repairs. some are physical safety risks or preservation work. one in five miles of our highways and major roads are in poor condition. that’s 186,000 miles of highway. aviation: 20 percent of all flights — 20 percent of all flights weren’t on time, resulting in 1.5 million hours lost in production. six to ten million homes in america still have lead pipes servicing their water lines. we have over 100,000 wellheads that are not capped, leaking methane. what are we doing? and, by the way, we can put as many pipefitters and miners and — to work capping those wells at the same price that they would charge to dig those wells. so, i — i just find it frustrated — frustrating to talk about. last point i’ll make on the infrastructure — and i apologize for spending more time on it, but — is that if you think about it, it’s the place where we will be able to significantly increase american productivity, at the same time providing really good jobs for people. but we can’t build back to what they used to be. we have to build — the environment has — global warming has already done significant damage. the roads that used to be above the water level — didn’t have to worry about where the drainage ditch was — now you got to rebuild them three feet higher. because it’s not going to go back to what it was before; it will only get worse, unless we stop it. there’s so much we can do. look at all of the schools in america. most of you live in the washington area now. but in your hometowns — i don’t know where you’re all from — how many schools where the kids can’t drink the water out of the fountain? how many schools are still in the position where there’s asbestos? how many schools in america we’re sending our kids to don’t have adequate ventilation? how many homes, buildings, office complexes are wasting billions of barrels of oil over time because they can’t hold in the heat or the air conditioning because it leaks through the windows that are so porous and the connections? it’s amazing. so there’s so much we can do that’s good stuff, makes people healthier, and creates good jobs. and i think that i got one more question here. janet from univision. q thank you, mr. president. we, too, have been reporting at the border. and just like cecilia, we ran into a pair of siblings who came in on monday, who were detained by cbp — had the phone number for their mother who lives in the u.s. we have contacted the mother. that’s the only way they know her kids are here because cbp, today, thursday, has not contacted that mother. so when can we expect your promise of things getting better with contacting and expediency and processing? well, they’re already getting better, but they’re going to get real — they’ll get a whole hell of lot better real quick, or we’re going to hear of some people leaving, okay? we can get this done. we’re going to get it done. i had a long meeting with the entire team and several cabinet-level officers the other night. we’re going to be moving, within the next — within the next week, over 100,000 — i mean, 1,000 people out of the border patrol into safe, secure beds and facilities. we’re going to significantly ramp up. we’re already out there contacting everyone, from getting some of the employees at hhs — and there’s a lot of them doing other things — and move them into making those calls. we’re in a — we’re in the process of rearranging and providing for the personnel needed to get that done. but i admire the fact that you were down there; you’re making the calls yourself. it’s real. the next thing that has to happen though — as you well know has to happen — there have to be some certitude that this is the — actually mom, dad, or whomever. and there’s ways to do that. there’s ways to do that — a little bit like determining whether or not you got the right code for your credit card, you know? “what was your dog’s name?” kind of a thing. i’m being a bit facetious, but not really. and also seeking harder data, from dna to — to birth certificates, which takes longer. so, i want to do this as quickly as humanly possible and as safely as possible. q as you well know, treating the root cau- — causes in latin america doesn’t change things overnight. how do you realistically and physically keep these families from coming to the u.s. when things will not get better in their countries right away? well, i can’t guarantee that. but i know, you know, that old thing: the journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step. you know as well as i do; you cover it: you have serious — it’s not like somebody at a sitting hand-hewn table in guatemala — i mean, in — in somewhere in mexico or in guadalupe, saying, “i got a great idea. let’s sell everything we have. give it to a coyote. have him take our kids across the border and into a desert where they don’t speak the language. won’t that be fun? let’s go.” that’s not how it happens. people don’t want to leave. when my great grandfather got on a coffin ship in the irish sea, expectation was: was he going to live long enough on that ship to get to the united states of america? but they left because of what the brits had been doing. they were in real, real trouble. they didn’t want to leave. but they had no choice. so you got — we can’t — i can’t guarantee we’re going to solve everything, but i can guarantee we can make everything better. we can make it better. we can change the lives of so many people. and the other thing i want to point out to you and i hope you point out: i realize it’s much more heart wrenching — and it is — to deal with a five- and six- and seven-year-old. but you went down there, and you saw: the vast majority of these children — 70 percent — are 16 years old, 17 years old, and mostly males. doesn’t make it — that doesn’t make it good, bad, or indifferent. but the idea that we have tens of thousands of kids in these god-awful facilities that are, really, little babies crying all night — and there’s some; that’s true. that’s why we got to act. and yesterday, i asked my team — both the director of the two agencies, as well as others — i asked them what would they, in fact — and i asked their opinion because they’re the experts — but i said, “focus on the most vulnerable immediately.” but there’s no reason why, in the next month, as people cross the border, that phone call can’t be made in the first 48 hours and begin. q if i may ask one last question: have you had any talks with senate republicans who are threatening this administration with not considering the immigration legislation that was passed in the house until the situation at the border has been resolved? no, because i know they have to posture for a while. they sort of got to get it out of their system. this is a — but i’m ready to work with any republican who wants to help solve the problem and make the situation better. but, folks, i’m going. thank you very, very much. i appreciate it. thank you. good afternoon. i want to speak today to the unfolding situation in afghanistan: the developments that have taken place in the last week and the steps we’re taking to address the rapidly evolving events. my national security team and i have been closely monitoring the situation on the ground in afghanistan and moving quickly to execute the plans we had put in place to respond to every constituency, including—and contingency—including the rapid collapse we’re seeing now. i’ll speak more in a moment about the specific steps we’re taking, but i want to remind everyone how we got here and what america’s interests are in afghanistan. we went to afghanistan almost 20 years ago with clear goals: get those who attacked us on september 11th, 2001, and make sure al qaeda could not use afghanistan as a base from which to attack us again. we did that. we severely degraded al qaeda in afghanistan. we never gave up the hunt for osama bin laden, and we got him. that was a decade ago. our mission in afghanistan was never supposed to have been nation building. it was never supposed to be creating a unified, centralized democracy. our only vital national interest in afghanistan remains today what it has always been: preventing a terrorist attack on american homeland. i’ve argued for many years that our mission should be narrowly focused on counterterrorism—not counterinsurgency or nation building. that’s why i opposed the surge when it was proposed in 2009 when i was vice president. and that’s why, as president, i am adamant that we focus on the threats we face today in 2021—not yesterday’s threats. today, the terrorist threat has metastasized well beyond afghanistan: al shabaab in somalia, al qaeda in the arabian peninsula, al-nusra in syria, isis attempting to create a caliphate in syria and iraq and establishing affiliates in multiple countries in africa and asia. these threats warrant our attention and our resources. we conduct effective counterterrorism missions against terrorist groups in multiple countries where we don’t have a permanent military presence. if necessary, we will do the same in afghanistan. we’ve developed counterterrorism over-the-horizon capability that will allow us to keep our eyes firmly fixed on any direct threats to the united states in the region and to act quickly and decisively if needed. when i came into office, i inherited a deal that president trump negotiated with the taliban. under his agreement, u.s. forces would be out of afghanistan by may 1, 2021—just a little over three months after i took office. u.s. forces had already drawn down during the trump administration from roughly 15,500 american forces to 2,500 troops in country, and the taliban was at its strongest militarily since 2001. the choice i had to make, as your president, was either to follow through on that agreement or be prepared to go back to fighting the taliban in the middle of the spring fighting season. there would have been no ceasefire after may 1. there was no agreement protecting our forces after may 1. there was no status quo of stability without american casualties after may 1. there was only the cold reality of either following through on the agreement to withdraw our forces or escalating the conflict and sending thousands more american troops back into combat in afghanistan, lurching into the third decade of conflict. i stand squarely behind my decision. after 20 years, i’ve learned the hard way that there was never a good time to withdraw u.s. forces. that’s why we were still there. we were clear-eyed about the risks. we planned for every contingency. but i always promised the american people that i will be straight with you. the truth is: this did unfold more quickly than we had anticipated. so what’s happened? afghanistan political leaders gave up and fled the country. the afghan military collapsed, sometimes without trying to fight. if anything, the developments of the past week reinforced that ending u.s. military involvement in afghanistan now was the right decision. american troops cannot and should not be fighting in a war and dying in a war that afghan forces are not willing to fight for themselves. we spent over a trillion dollars. we trained and equipped an afghan military force of some 300,000 strong—incredibly well equipped—a force larger in size than the militaries of many of our nato allies. we gave them every tool they could need. we paid their salaries, provided for the maintenance of their air force—something the taliban doesn’t have. taliban does not have an air force. we provided close air support. we gave them every chance to determine their own future. what we could not provide them was the will to fight for that future. there’s some very brave and capable afghan special forces units and soldiers, but if afghanistan is unable to mount any real resistance to the taliban now, there is no chance that 1 year—1 more year, 5 more years, or 20 more years of u.s. military boots on the ground would’ve made any difference. and here’s what i believe to my core: it is wrong to order american troops to step up when afghanistan’s own armed forces would not. if the political leaders of afghanistan were unable to come together for the good of their people, unable to negotiate for the future of their country when the chips were down, they would never have done so while u.s. troops remained in afghanistan bearing the brunt of the fighting for them. and our true strategic competitors—china and russia—would love nothing more than the united states to continue to funnel billions of dollars in resources and attention into stabilizing afghanistan indefinitely. when i hosted president ghani and chairman abdullah at the white house in june and again when i spoke by phone to ghani in july, we had very frank conversations. we talked about how afghanistan should prepare to fight their civil wars after the u.s. military departed, to clean up the corruption in government so the government could function for the afghan people. we talked extensively about the need for afghan leaders to unite politically. they failed to do any of that. i also urged them to engage in diplomacy, to seek a political settlement with the taliban. this advice was flatly refused. mr. ghani insisted the afghan forces would fight, but obviously he was wrong. so i’m left again to ask of those who argue that we should stay: how many more generations of america’s daughters and sons would you have me send to fight afghans—afghanistan’s civil war when afghan troops will not? how many more lives—american lives—is it worth? how many endless rows of headstones at arlington national cemetery? i’m clear on my answer: i will not repeat the mistakes we’ve made in the past—the mistake of staying and fighting indefinitely in a conflict that is not in the national interest of the united states, of doubling down on a civil war in a foreign country, of attempting to remake a country through the endless military deployments of u.s. forces. those are the mistakes we cannot continue to repeat, because we have significant vital interests in the world that we cannot afford to ignore. i also want to acknowledge how painful this is to so many of us. the scenes we’re seeing in afghanistan, they’re gut-wrenching, particularly for our veterans, our diplomats, humanitarian workers, for anyone who has spent time on the ground working to support the afghan people. for those who have lost loved ones in afghanistan and for americans who have fought and served in the country—serve our country in afghanistan—this is deeply, deeply personal. it is for me as well. i’ve worked on these issues as long as anyone. i’ve been throughout afghanistan during this war—while the war was going on—from kabul to kandahar to the kunar valley. i’ve traveled there on four different occasions. i met with the people. i’ve spoken to the leaders. i spent time with our troops. and i came to understand firsthand what was and was not possible in afghanistan. so, now we’re fercus [sic]—focused on what is possible. we will continue to support the afghan people. we will lead with our diplomacy, our international influence, and our humanitarian aid. we’ll continue to push for regional diplomacy and engagement to prevent violence and instability. we’ll continue to speak out for the basic rights of the afghan people—of women and girls—just as we speak out all over the world. i have been clear that human rights must be the center of our foreign policy, not the periphery. but the way to do it is not through endless military deployments; it’s with our diplomacy, our economic tools, and rallying the world to join us. now, let me lay out the current mission in afghanistan. i was asked to authorize—and i did—6,000 u.s. troops to deploy to afghanistan for the purpose of assisting in the departure of u.s. and allied civilian personnel from afghanistan, and to evacuate our afghan allies and vulnerable afghans to safety outside of afghanistan. our troops are working to secure the airfield and to ensure continued operation of both the civilian and military flights. we’re taking over air traffic control. we have safely shut down our embassy and transferred our diplomats. our dip-—our diplomatic presence is now consolidated at the airport as well. over the coming days, we intend to transport out thousands of american citizens who have been living and working in afghanistan. we’ll also continue to support the safe departure of civilian personnel—the civilian personnel of our allies who are still serving in afghanistan. operation allies refugee [refuge], which i announced back in july, has already moved 2,000 afghans who are eligible for special immigration visas and their families to the united states. in the coming days, the u.s. military will provide assistance to move more siv-eligible afghans and their families out of afghanistan. we’re also expanding refugee access to cover other vulnerable afghans who worked for our embassy: u.s. non-governmental agencies—or the u.s. non-governmental organizations; and afghans who otherwise are at great risk; and u.s. news agencies. i know that there are concerns about why we did not begin evacuating afghans—civilians sooner. part of the answer is some of the afghans did not want to leave earlier—still hopeful for their country. and part of it was because the afghan government and its supporters discouraged us from organizing a mass exodus to avoid triggering, as they said, “a crisis of confidence.” american troops are performing this mission as professionally and as effectively as they always do, but it is not without risks. as we carry out this departure, we have made it clear to the taliban: if they attack our personnel or disrupt our operation, the u.s. presence will be swift and the response will be swift and forceful. we will defend our people with devastating force if necessary. our current military mission will be short in time, limited in scope, and focused in its objectives: get our people and our allies to safety as quickly as possible. and once we have completed this mission, we will conclude our military withdrawal. we will end america’s longest war after 20 long years of bloodshed. the events we’re seeing now are sadly proof that no amount of military force would ever deliver a stable, united, and secure afghanistan—as known in history as the “graveyard of empires.” what is happening now could just as easily have happened 5 years ago or 15 years in the future. we have to be honest: our mission in afghanistan has taken many missteps—made many missteps over the past two decades. i’m now the fourth american president to preside over war in afghanistan—two democrats and two republicans. i will not pass this responsibly on—responsibility on to a fifth president. i will not mislead the american people by claiming that just a little more time in afghanistan will make all the difference. nor will i shrink from my share of responsibility for where we are today and how we must move forward from here. i am president of the united states of america, and the buck stops with me. i am deeply saddened by the facts we now face. but i do not regret my decision to end america’s warfighting in afghanistan and maintain a laser-focus on our counterterrorism missions there and in other parts of the world. our mission to degrade the terrorist threat of al qaeda in afghanistan and kill osama bin laden was a success. our decades-long effort to overcome centuries of history and permanently change and remake afghanistan was not, and i wrote and believed it never could be. i cannot and i will not ask our troops to fight on endlessly in another—in another country’s civil war, taking casualties, suffering life-shattering injuries, leaving families broken by grief and loss. this is not in our national security interest. it is not what the american people want. it is not what our troops, who have sacrificed so much over the past two decades, deserve. i made a commitment to the american people when i ran for president that i would bring america’s military involvement in afghanistan to an end. and while it’s been hard and messy—and yes, far from perfect—i’ve honored that commitment. more importantly, i made a commitment to the brave men and women who serve this nation that i wasn’t going to ask them to continue to risk their lives in a military action that should have ended long ago. our leaders did that in vietnam when i got here as a young man. i will not do it in afghanistan. i know my decision will be criticized, but i would rather take all that criticism than pass this decision on to another president of the united states—yet another one—a fifth one. because it’s the right one—it’s the right decision for our people. the right one for our brave service members who have risked their lives serving our nation. and it’s the right one for america. so, thank you. may god protect our troops, our diplomats, and all of the brave americans serving in harm’s way. hello, folks. (the president checks his watch.) just checking it’s afternoon. (laughter.)good afternoon. before i begin my remarks, i just wanted to say a few words about what happened yesterday in new york city.the american principle that no one is above the law was reaffirmed.donald trump was given every opportunity to defend himself.it was a state case, not a federal case. and it was heard by a jury of 12 citizens—12 americans, 12 people like you. like millions of americans who served on juries, this jury was chosen the same way every jury in america is chosen. it was a process that donald trump’s attorney was part of.the jury heard five weeks of evidence—five weeks. and after careful deliberation, the jury reached a unanimous verdict. they found donald trump guilty on all 34 felony counts. now he’ll be given the opportunity, as he should, to appeal that decision just like everyone else has that opportunity.that’s how the american system of justice works.and it’s reckless, it’s dangerous, and it’s irresponsible for anyone to say this was rigged just because they don’t like the verdict.our justice system has endured for nearly 250 years, and it literally is the cornerstone of america—our justice system.the justice system should be respected, and we should never allow anyone to tear it down. it’s as simple as that.that’s america. that’s who we are. and that’s who we’ll always be, god willing.now to another issue. i want to give an update on my efforts to end the crisis in gaza.for the past several months, my negotiators of foreign policy, intelligence community, and the like have been relentlessly focused not just on a ceasefire that would inevitably be fragile and temporary but on a durable end to the war. that’s been the focus: a durable end to this war.one that brings all the hostages home, ensures israel’s security, creates a better “day after” in gaza without hamas in power, and sets the stage for a political settlement that provides a better future for israelis and palestinians alike.now, after intensive diplomacy carried out by my team and my many conversations with leaders of israel, qatar, and egypt and other middle eastern countries, israel has now offered—israel has offered a comprehensive new proposal.it’s a roadmap to an enduring ceasefire and the release of all hostages.this proposal has been transmitted by qatar to hamas.today, i want to lay out its terms for the american citizens and for the world.this new proposal has three phases—three.the first phase would last for six weeks. here’s what it would include: a full and complete ceasefire; a withdrawal of israeli forces from all populated areas of gaza; a release of a number of hostages—including women, the elderly, the wounded—in exchange for the release of hundreds of palestinian prisoners. there are american hostages who would be released at this stage, and we want them home.additional, some remains of hostages who have been killed would be returned to their families, bringing some degree of closure to their terrible grief.palestinians—civilians—would return to their homes and neighborhoods in all areas of gaza, including in the north.humanitarian assistance would surge with 600 trucks carrying aid into gaza every single day.with a ceasefire, that aid could be safely and effectively distributed to all who need it. hundreds of thousands of temporary shelters, including housing units, would be delivered by the international community.all of that and more would begin immediately—immediately.during the six weeks of phase one, israel and hamas would negotiate the necessary arrangements to get to phase two, which is a permanent end to hostilities.now, i’ll be straight with you. there are a number of details to negotiate to move from phase one to phase two. israel will want to make sure its interests are protected.but the proposal says if the negotiations take longer than six weeks for phase one, the ceasefire will still continue as long as negotiations continue.and the united states, egypt, and qatar would work to ensure negotiations keep going—all agreements—all agreements—until all the agreements are reached and phase two is able to begin.then phase two: there would be an exchange for the release of all remaining living hostages, including male soldiers; israeli forces would withdraw from gaza; and as long as hamas lives up to its commitments, a temporary ceasefire would become, in the words of the israeli proposal, “the cessation of hostilities permanently,” end of quote. “cessation of hostilities permanently.”finally, in phase three, a major reconstruction plan for gaza would commence. and any final remains of hostages who have been killed would be returned to their families.that’s the offer that’s now on the table and what we’ve been asking for. it’s what we need.the people of israel should know they can make this offer without any further risk to their own security because they’ve devastated hamas forces over the past eight months. at this point, hamas no longer is capable of carrying out another october 7th, which—one of the israelis’ main objective in this war and, quite frankly, a righteous one.i know there are those in israel who will not agree with this plan and will call for the war to continue indefinitely. some are even in the government coalition. and they’ve made it clear: they want to occupy gaza, they want to keep fighting for years, and the hostages are not a priority to them.well, i’ve urged the leadership in israel to stand behind this deal, despite whatever pressure comes.and to the people of israel, let me say this. as someone whose had a lifelong commitment to israel, as the only american president who has ever gone to israel in a time of war, as someone who just sent the u.s. forces to directly defend israel when it was attacked by iran, i ask you to take a step back and think what will happen if this moment is lost.we can’t lose this moment. indefinite war in pursuit of an unidentified notion of “total victory” will not bring israel in—will not bring down—bog down—will only bog down israel in gaza, draining the economic, military, and human resources, and furthering israel’s isolation in the world.that will not bring hostages home. that will not bring an enduring defeat of hamas. that will not bring israel lasting security.but a comprehensive approach that starts with this deal will bring hostages home and will lead to a more secure israel. and once a ceasefire and hostage deal is concluded, it unlocks the possibility of a great deal more progress, including calm along israel’s northern border with lebanon.the united states will help forge a diplomatic resolution, one that ensures israel’s security and allows people to safely return to their homes without fear of being attacked.with a deal, a rebuilding of gaza will begin [with] arab nations and the international community, along with palestinian and israeli leaders, to get it done in a manner that does not allow hamas to re-arm.and the united states will work with our partners to rebuild homes, schools, and hospitals in gaza to help repair communities that were destroyed in the chaos of war.and with this deal, israel could become more deeply integrated into the region, including—it’s no surprise to you all—including a potential historic normalization agreement with saudi arabia. israel could be part of a regional security network to counter the threat posed by iran.all of this progress would make israel more secure, with israeli families no longer living in the shadow of a terrorist attack.and all of this would create the conditions for a different future and a better future for the palestinian people, one of self-determination, dignity, security, and freedom. this path is available once the deal is struck.israel will always have the right to defend itself against the threats to its security and to bring those responsible for october 7th to justice. and the united states will always ensure that israel has what it needs to defend itself.if hamas fails to fulfill its commitments under the deal, israel can resume military operations. but egypt and qatar have assured me and they are continuing to work to ensure that hamas doesn’t do that. and the united states will help ensure that israel lives up to their obligations as well.that’s what this deal says. that’s what it says. and we’ll do our part.this is truly a decisive moment. israel has made their proposal. hamas says it wants a ceasefire. this deal is an opportunity to prove whether they really mean it.hamas needs to take the deal.for months, people all over the world have called for a ceasefire. now it’s time to raise your voices and to demand that hamas come to the table, agrees to this deal, and ends this war that they began.of course, there will be differences on the specific details that need to be worked out. that’s natural. if hamas comes to negotiate ready to deal, then israel negotiations must be given a mandate, the necessary flexibility to close that deal.the past eight months have marked heartbreaking pain: pain of those whose loved ones were slaughtered by hamas terrorists on october 7th; hostages and their families waiting in anguish; ordinary israelis whose lives were forever marked by the shattering event of hamas’s sexual violence and ruthless brutality.and the palestinian people have endured sheer hell in this war. too many innocent people have been killed, including thousands of children. far too many have been badly wounded.we all saw the terrible images from the deadly fire in rafah earlier this week following an israeli strike against—targeting hamas. and even as we work to surge assistance to gaza, with 1,800 trucks delivering supplies these last five days—1,800—the humanitarian crisis still remains.i know this is a subject on which people in this country feel deep, passionate convictions. and so do i. this has been one of the hardest, most complicated problems in the world. there’s nothing easy about this—nothing easy about it.through it all, though, the united states has worked relentlessly to support israelis’ security, to get humanitarian supplies into gaza, and to get a ceasefire and a hostage deal to bring this war to an end.yesterday, with this new initiative, we’ve taken an important step in that direction.and i want to level with you today as to where we are and what might be possible. but i need your help. everyone who wants peace now must raise their voices and let the leaders know they should take this deal; work to make it real, make it lasting; and forge a better future out of the tragic terror attack and war.it’s time to begin this new stage, for the hostages to come home, for israel to be secure, for the suffering to stop. it’s time for this war to end and for the day after to begin.thank you very much. my fellow leaders, today is the fourth time i’ve had the great honor of speaking to this assembly as president of the united states. it will be my last.i’ve seen a remarkable sweep of history. i was first elected to office in the united states of america as a u.s. senator in 1972. now, i know i look like i’m only 40. i know that.i was 29 years old. back then, we were living through an inflection point, a moment of tension and uncertainty. the world was divided by the cold war. the middle east was headed toward war. america was at war in vietnam, and at that point, the longest war in america’s history. our country was divided and angry, and there were questions about our staying power and our future. but even then, i entered public life not out of despair but out of optimism. the united states and the world got through that moment. it wasn’t easy or simple or without significant setbacks. but we would go on to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons throughout the — through arms control and then go on to bring the cold war itself to an end. israel and egypt went to war but then forged a historic peace. we ended the war in vietnam. the — last year, in hanoi, i was — met with the vietnamese leadership, and we elevated our partnership to the highest level. it’s a testament to the resilience of the human spirit and the capacity for reconciliation that today the united states and vietnam are partners and friends, and it’s proof that even from the horrors of war there is a way forward. things can get better. we should never forget that. i have seen that throughout my career. in the 1980s, i spoke out against apartheid in south africa, and then i watched the racist regime fall. in the 1990s, i worked to hold milošević accountable for war crimes. he was held accountable.at home, i wrote and passed the violence against women act to end the scourge of violence against women and girls not only in america but across the world, as many of you have as well. but we have so much more to do, especially against rape and sexual violence as weapons of war and terror.we were attacked on 9/11 by al-qaeda and osama bin laden. we brought him justice. then i came to the presidency in another moment in a crisis and uncertainty. i believed america had to look forward. new challenges, new threats, new opportunities were in front of us. we needed to put ourselves in a position to see the threats, to deal with the challenges, and to seize the opportunities as well. we needed to end the era of war that began on 9/11. as vice president to president obama, he asked me to work to wind down the military operations in iraq. and we did, painful as it was. when i came to office as president, afghanistan had replaced vietnam as america’s longest war. i was determined to end it, and i did. it was a hard decision but the right decision. four american presidents had faced that decision, but i was determined not to leave it to the fifth. it was a decision accompanied by tragedy. thirteen brave americans lost their lives along with hundreds of afghans in a suicide bomb. i think those lost lives — i think of them every day.i think of all the 2,461 u.s. military deaths over a long 20 years of that war. 20,744 american servicemen wounded in action. i think of their service, their sacrifice, and their heroism. i know other countries lost their own men and women fighting alongside us. we honor their sacrifices as well.to face the future, i was also determined to rebuild my country’s alliances and partnerships to a level not previously seen. we did — we did just that, from traditional treaty alliances to new partnerships like the quad with the united states, japan, australia, and india. i know — i know many look at the world today and see difficulties and react with despair, but i do not. i won’t. as leaders, we don’t have the luxury. i recognize the challenges from ukraine to gaza to sudan and beyond: war, hunger, terrorism, brutality, record displacement of people, a climate crisis, democracy at risk, strains within our societies, the promise of artificial intelligence and its significant risks. the list goes on. but maybe because of all i’ve seen and all we have done together over the decades, i have hope. i know there is a way forward.in 1919, the irish poet william butler yeats described a world, and i quote, where “things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,” end of quote.some may say those words describe the world not just in 1919 but in 2024. but i see a critical distinction. in our time, the center has held. leaders and people from every region and across the political spectrum have stood together. turned the page — we turned the page on the worst pandemic in a century. we made sure covid no longer controls our lives. we defended the u.n. charter and ensured the survival of ukraine as a free nation. my country made the largest investment in climate and clean energy ever, anywhere in history.there will always be forces that pull our countries apart and the world apart: aggression, extremism, chaos, and cynicism, a desire to retreat from the world and go it alone. our task, our test is to make sure that the forces holding us together are stronger than those that are pulling us apart, that the principles of partnership that we came here each year to uphold can withstand the challenges, that the center holds once again.my fellow leaders, i truly believe we are at another inflection point in world history where the choices we make today will determine our future for decades to come. will we stand behind the principles that unite us? we stand firm against aggression. we — will we end the conflicts that are raging today? will we take on global challenges like climate change, hunger, and disease? will we plan now for the opportunities and risk of a revolutionary new technologies?i want to talk today about each of those decisions and the actions, in my view, we must take.to start, each of us in this body has made a commitment to the principles of the u.n. charter, to stand up against aggression. when russia invaded ukraine, we could have stood by and merely protested. but vice president harris and i understood that that was an assault on everything this institution is supposed to stand for. and so, at my direction, america stepped into the breach, providing massive security and economic and humanitarian assistance. our nato allies and partners in 50-plus nations stood up as well. but most importantly, the ukrainian people stood up. and i ask the people of this chamber to stand up for them.the good news is putin’s war has failed at his core aim. he set out to destroy ukraine, but ukraine is still free. he set out to weaken nato, but nato is bigger, stronger, and more united than ever before with two new members, finland and sweden. but we cannot let up.the world now has another choice to make: will we sustain our support to help ukraine win this war and preserve its freedom or walk away and let aggression be renewed and a nation be destroyed?i know my answer. we cannot grow weary. we cannot look away. and we will not let up on our support for ukraine, not until ukraine wins a just and durable peace [based] on the u.n. charter.we also need to uphold our principles as we seek to responsibly manage the competition with china so it does not veer into conflict. we stand ready to cooperate on urgent challenges for the good of our people and the people everywhere.we recently resumed cooperation with china to stop the flow of deadly synthetic narcotics. i appreciate the collaboration. it matters for the people in my country and many others around the world.on matters of conviction, the united states is unabashed, pushing back against unfair economic competition and against military coercion of other nations in the south china sea, in maintaining peace and stability across the taiwan straits, in protecting our most advanced technologies so they cannot be used against us or any of our partners. at the same time, we’re going to continue to strengthen our network of alliances and partnerships across the indo-pacific. these partnerships are not against any nation. they are building blocks for a free, open, secure, and peaceful indo-pacific.we are also working to bring a greater measure of peace and stability to the middle east. the world must not flinch from the horrors of october 7th. any country — any country would have the right and responsibility to ensure that such an attack can never happen again. thousands of armed hamas terrorists invaded a sovereign state, slaughtering and massacring more than 1,200 people, including 46 americans, in their homes and at a music festival; despicable acts of sexual violence; 250 innocents taken hostage. i’ve met with the families of those hostages. i’ve grieved with them. they’re going through hell. innocent civilians in gaza are also going through hell. thousands and thousands killed, including aid workers. too many families dislocated, crowding into tents, facing a dire humanitarian situation. they didn’t ask for this war that hamas started. i put forward with qatar and egypt a ceasefire and hostage deal. it’s been endorsed by the u.n. security council. now is the time for the parties to finalize its terms, bring the hostages home, secure security for israel, and gaza free of hamas’ grip, ease the suffering in gaza, and end this war.on october 7th — (applause) — since october 7, we have also been determined to prevent a wider war that engulfs the entire region. hezbollah, unprovoked, joined the october 7th attack launching rockets into israel. almost a year later, too many on each side of the israeli-lebanon border remain displaced. full-scale war is not in anyone’s interest. even as the situation has escalated, a diplomatic solution is still possible. in fact, it remains the only path to lasting security to allow the residents from both countries to return to their homes on the border safely. and that’s what working — that’s what we’re working tirelessly to achieve.as we look ahead, we must also address the rise of violence against innocent palestinians on the west bank and set the conditions for a better future, including a two-state solution, where the world — where israel enjoys security and peace and full recognition and normalized relations with all its neighbors, where palestinians live in security, dignity, and self-determination in a state of their own. (applause.)progress toward peace will put us in a stronger position to deal with the ongoing threat posed by iran. together, we must deny oxygen to terrorists — to its terrorist proxies, which have called for more october 7ths, and ensure that iran will never, ever obtain a nuclear weapon.gaza is not the only conflict that deserves our outrage. in sudan, a bloody civil war unleashed one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises: eight million — eight million on the brink of famine, hundreds of thousands already there, atrocities in darfur and elsewhere. the united states has led the world in providing humanitarian aid to sudan. and with our partners, we have led diplomatic talks to try to silence the guns and avert a wider famine. the world needs to stop arming the generals, to speak with one voice and tell them: stop tearing your country apart. stop blocking aid to the sudanese people. end this war now.but people need more than the absence of war. they need the chance — the chance to live in dignity. they need to be protected from the ravages of climate change, hunger, and disease. our administration has invested over $150 billion to make progress and other sustainable development goals. it includes $20 billion for food security and over $50 billion for global health. we’ve mobilized billions more in private-sector investment. we’ve taken the most ambitious climate actions in history. we’ve moved to rejoin the paris agreement on day one. and today, my country is finally on track to cut emissions in half by 2030, on track to honor my pledge to quadruple climate financing to developing nations with $11 billion thus far this year. we’ve rejoined the world health organization and donated nearly 700 million doses of covid vaccine to 117 countries. we must now move quickly to face mpox outbreak in africa. we are prepared to commit $500 million to help african countries prevent and respond to mpox and to donate 1 million doses of mpox vaccine now. we call on our partners to match our pledge and make this a billion-dollar commitment to the people of africa. beyond the core necessities of food and health, the united states, the g7, and our partners have embarked on an ambitious initiative to mobilize and deliver significant financing to the developing world. we are working to help countries build out their infrastructure, to clean energy transition, to their digital transformation to lay new economic foundations for a prosperous future. it’s called the partnership for global infrastructure and investment. we’ve already starting to see the fruits of this emerge in southern africa and in southeast asia and in the americas. we have to keep it going. i want to get things done together. in order to do that, we must build a stronger, more effective, and more inclusive united nations. the u.n. needs to adapt to bring in new voices and new perspectives. that’s why we support reforming and expanding the membership of the u.n. security council.my u.n. ambassador just laid out our detailed vision to reflect today’s world, not yesterday’s. it’s time to move forward. and the security council, like the u.n. itself, needs to get back to the job of making peace; of brokering deals to end wars and suffering; and to stop the spread of the most dangerous weapons; of stabilizing troubled regions in east africa — from east africa to haiti, to kenya-led mission that’s working alongside the haitian people to turn the tide.we also have a responsibility to prepare our citizens for the future. we’ll see more technological change, i argue, in the next 2 to 10 years than we have in the last 50 years.artificial intelligence is going to change our ways of life, our ways of work, and our ways of war. it could usher in scientific progress at a pace never seen before. and much of it could make our lives better. but ai also brings profound risks, from deepfakes to disinformation to novel pathogens to bioweapons. we have worked at home and abroad to define the new norms and standards. this year, we achieved the first-ever general assembly resolution on ai to start developing global rules of the road. we also announced a declaration of the responsible use of ai, joined by 60 countries in this chamber.but let’s be honest. this is just the tip of the iceberg of what we need to do to manage this new technology. nothing is certain about how ai will evolve or how it will be deployed. no one knows all the answers.but my fellow leaders, it’s with humility i offer two questions. first: how do we as an international community govern ai? as countries and companies race to uncertain frontiers, we need an equally urgent effort to ensure ai’s safety, security, and trustworthiness. as ai grows more powerful, it also must grow more responsive to our collective needs and values. the benefits of all must be shared equitably. it should be harnessed to narrow, not deepen, digital divides.second: will we ensure that ai supports, rather than undermines, the core principles that human life has value and all humans deserve dignity? we must make certain that the awesome capabilities of ai will be used to uplift and empower everyday people, not to give dictators more powerful shackles on the human spirit. in the years ahead, there may well be no greater test of our leadership than how we deal with ai. let me close with this. even as we navigate so much change, one thing must not change: we must never forget who we’re here to represent. “we the people.” these are the first words of our constitution, the very idea of america. and they inspired the opening words of the u.n. charter. i’ve made the preservation of democracy the central cause of my presidency. this summer, i faced a decision whether to seek a second term as president. it was a difficult decision. being president has been the honor of my life. there is so much more i want to get done. but as much as i love the job, i love my country more. i decided, after 50 years of public service, it’s time for a new generation of leadership to take my nation forward. my fellow leaders, let us never forget, some things are more important than staying in power. it’s your people — (applause) — it’s your people that matter the most. never forget, we are here to serve the people, not the other way around. because the future will be won by those who unleash the full potential of their people to breathe free, to think freely, to innovate, to educate, to live and love openly without fear. that’s the soul of democracy. it does not belong to any one country. i’ve seen it all around the world in the brave men and women who ended apartheid, brought down the berlin wall, fight today for freedom and justice and dignity. we saw it — that universal yearning for rights and freedom — in venezuela, where millions cast their vote for change. it hasn’t been recognized, but it can’t be denied. the world knows the truth. we saw it in uganda lgbt activists demanding safety and recognition of their common humanity. we see it in citizens across the world peacefully choosing their future — from ghana to india to south korea, nations representing one quarter of humanity who will hold elections this year alone. it’s remarkable, the power of “we the people,” that makes me more optimistic about the future than i’ve ever been since i was first elected to the united states senate in 1972.every age faces its challenges. i saw it as a young man. i see it today. but we are stronger than we think. we’re stronger together than alone. and what the people call “impossible” is just an illusion. nelson mandela taught us, and i quote, “it always seems impossible until it’s done.” “it always seems impossible until it’s done.”my fellow leaders, there is nothing that’s beyond our capacity if we work together. let’s work together.god bless you all. and may god protect all those who seek peace. thank you. (applause.) Transcript
Thank you. 
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, my fellow leaders, in the last year, our world has experienced great upheaval: a growing crisis in food insecurity; record heat, floods, and droughts; COVID-19; inflation; and a brutal, needless war—a war chosen by one man, to be very blunt. 
Let us speak plainly. A permanent member of the United Nations Security Council invaded its neighbor, attempted to erase a sovereign state from the map. 
Russia has shamelessly violated the core tenets of the United Nations Charter—no more important than the clear prohibition against countries taking the territory of their neighbor by force. 
Again, just today, President Putin has made overt nuclear threats against Europe and a reckless disregard for the responsibilities of the non-proliferation regime. 
Now Russia is calling—calling up more soldiers to join the fight. And the Kremlin is organizing a sham referenda to try to annex parts of Ukraine, an extremely significant violation of the U.N. Charter. 
This world should see these outrageous acts for what they are. Putin claims he had to act because Russia was threatened. But no one threatened Russia, and no one other than Russia sought conflict. 
In fact, we warned it was coming. And with many of you, we worked to try to avert it.
Putin’s own words make his true purpose unmistakable. Just before he invaded, Putin asserted—and I quote—Ukraine was “created by Russia” and never had, quote, “real statehood.”
And now we see attacks on schools, railway stations, hospitals, wa-—on centers of Ukrainian history and culture. 
In the past, even more horrifying evidence of Russia’s atrocity and war crimes: mass graves uncovered in Izyum; bodies, according to those that excavated those bodies, showing signs of torture. 
This war is about extinguishing Ukraine’s right to exist as a state, plain and simple, and Ukraine’s right to exist as a people. Whoever you are, wherever you live, whatever you believe, that should not—that should make your blood run cold.
That’s why 141 nations in the General Assembly came together to unequivocally condemn Russia’s war against Ukraine. The United States has marshaled massive levels of security assistance and humanitarian aid and direct economic support for Ukraine—more than $25 billion to date. 
Our allies and partners around the world have stepped up as well. And today, more than 40 countries represented in here have contributed billions of their own money and equipment to help Ukraine defend itself. 
The United States is also working closely with our allies and partners to impose costs on Russia, to deter attacks against NATO territory, to hold Russia accountable for the atrocities and war crimes.
Because if nations can pursue their imperial ambitions without consequences, then we put at risk everything this very institution stands for. Everything.
Every victory won on the battlefield belongs to the courageous Ukrainian soldiers. But this past year, the world was tested as well, and we did not hesitate. 
We chose liberty. We chose sovereignty. We chose principles to which every party to the United Nations Charter is beholding. We stood with Ukraine.
Like you, the United States wants this war to end on just terms, on terms we all signed up for: that you cannot seize a nation’s territory by force. The only country standing in the way of that is Russia. 
So, we—each of us in this body who is determined to uphold the principles and beliefs we pledge to defend as members of the United Nations—must be clear, firm, and unwavering in our resolve. 
Ukraine has the same rights that belong to every sovereign nation. We will stand in solidarity with Ukraine. We will stand in solidarity against Russia’s aggression. Period.
Now, it’s no secret that in the contest between democracy and autocracy, the United States—and I, as President—champion a vision for our world that is grounded in the values of democracy. 
The United States is determined to defend and strengthen democracy at home and around the world. Because I believe democracy remains humanity’s greatest instrument to address the challenges of our time. 
We’re working with the G7 and likeminded countries to prove democracies can deliver for their citizens but also deliver for the rest of the world as well. 
But as we meet today, the U.N. Charter—the U.N. Charter’s very basis of a stable and just rule-based order is under attack by those who wish to tear it down or distort it for their own political advantage. 
And the United Nations Charter was not only signed by democracies of the world, it was negotiated among citizens of dozens of nations with vastly different histories and ideologies, united in their commitment to work for peace. 
As President Truman said in 1945, the U.N. Charter—and I quote—is “proof that nations, like men, can state their differences, can face them, and then can find common ground on which to stand.” End of quote.
That common ground was so straightforward, so basic that, today, 193 of you—193 member states—have willingly embraced its principles. And standing up for those principles for the U.N. Charter is the job of every responsible member state. 
I reject the use of violence and war to conquer nations or expand borders through bloodshed.
To stand against global politics of fear and coercion; to defend the sovereign rights of smaller nations as equal to those of larger ones; to embrace basic principles like freedom of navigation, respect for international law, and arms control—no matter what else we may disagree on, that is the common ground upon which we must stand. 
If you’re still committed to a strong foundation for the good of every nation around the world, then the United States wants to work with you. 
I also believe the time has come for this institution to become more inclusive so that it can better respond to the needs of today’s world.
Members of the U.N. Security Council, including the United States, should consistently uphold and defend the U.N. Charter and refrain—refrain from the use of the veto, except in rare, extraordinary situations, to ensure that the Council remains credible and effective.
That is also why the United States supports increasing the number of both permanent and non-permanent representatives of the Council. This includes permanent seats for those nations we’ve long supported and permanent seats for countries in Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean.
The United States is committed to this vital work. In every region, we pursued new, constructive ways to work with partners to advance shared interests, from elevating the Quad in the Indo-Pacific; to signing the Los Angeles Declaration of Migration and Protection at the Summit of the Americas; to joining a historic meeting of nine Arab leaders to work toward a more peaceful, integrated Middle East; to hosting the U.S.-Africa Leaders’ Summit in—this December.
As I said last year, the United States is opening an era of relentless diplomacy to address the challenges that matter most to people’s lives—all people’s lives: tackling the climate crisis, as the previous speaker spoke to; strengthening global health security; feeding the world—feeding the world.
We made that priority. And one year later, we’re keeping that promise.
From the day I came to office, we’ve led with a bold climate agenda. We rejoined the Paris Agreement, convened major climate summits, helped deliver critical agreements on COP26. And we helped get two thirds of the world GDP on track to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. 
And now I’ve signed a historic piece of legislation here in the United States that includes the biggest, most important climate commitment we have ever made in the history of our country: $369 billion toward climate change. That includes tens of billions in new investments in offshore wind and solar, doubling down on zero emission vehicles, increasing energy efficiency, supporting clean manufacturing.
Our Department of Energy estimates that this new law will reduce U.S. emissions by one gigaton a year by 2030 while unleashing a new era of clean-energy-powered economic growth.
Our investments will also help reduce the cost of developing clean energy technologies worldwide, not just the United States. This is a global gamechanger—and none too soon. We don’t have much time.
We all know we’re already living in a climate crisis. No one seems to doubt it after this past year. As we meet, much of Pakistan is still underwater; it needs help. Meanwhile, the Horn of Africa faces unprecedented drought. 
Families are facing impossible choices, choosing which child to feed and wondering whether they’ll survive.
This is the human cost of climate change. And it’s growing, not lessening.
So, as I announced last year, to meet our global responsibility, my administration is working with our Congress to deliver more than $11 billion a year to international climate finance to help lower-income countries implement their climate goals and ensure a just energy transition.
The key part of that will be our PREPARE plan, which will help half a billion people, and especially vulnerable countries, adapt to the impacts of climate change and build resilience.
This need is enormous. So let this be the moment we find within ourselves the will to turn back the tide of climate devastation and unlock a resilient, sustainable, clean energy economy to preserve our planet.
On global health, we’ve delivered more than 620 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine to 116 countries around the world, with more available to help meet countries’ needs—all free of charge, no strings attached.
And we’re working closely with the G20 and other countries. And the United States helped lead the change to establish a groundbreaking new Fund for Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness, and Response at the World Bank.
At the same time, we’ve continued to advance the ball on enduring global health challenges.
Later today, I’ll host the Seventh Replenishment Conference for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria. With bipartisan support in our Congress, I have pledged to contribute up to $6 billion to that effort.
So I look forward to welcoming a historic round of pledges at the conference resulting in one of the largest global health fundraisers ever held in all of history.
We’re also taking on the food crisis head on. With as many as 193 million people around the world experiencing acute—acute food insecurity—a jump of 40 million in a year—today I’m announcing another $2.9 billion in U.S. support for lifesaving humanitarian and food security assistance for this year alone.
Russia, in the meantime, is pumping out lies, trying to pin the blame for the crisis—the food crisis—onto sanctions imposed by many in the world for the aggression against Ukraine. 
So let me be perfectly clear about something: Our sanctions explicitly allow—explicitly allow Russia the ability to export food and fertilizer. No limitation. It’s Russia’s war that is worsening food insecurity, and only Russia can end it.
I’m grateful for the work here at the U.N.—including your leadership, Mr. Secretary-General—establishing a mechanism to export grain from Black Sea ports in Ukraine that Russia had blocked for months, and we need to make sure it’s extended.
We believe strongly in the need to feed the world. That’s why the United States is the world’s largest supporter of the World Food Programme, with more than 40 percent of its budget.
We’re leading support—we’re leading support of the UNICEF efforts to feed children around the world. 
And to take on the larger challenge of food insecurity, the United States introduced a Call to Action: a roadmap eliminating global food insecurity—to eliminating global food insecurity that more than 100 nation member states have already supported.
In June, the G7 announced more than $4.5 billion to strengthen food security around the world.
Through USAID’s Feed the Future initiative, the United States is scaling up innovative ways to get drought- and heat-resistant seeds into the hands of farmers who need them, while distributing fertilizer and improving fertilizer efficiency so that farmers can grow more while using less.
And we’re calling on all countries to refrain from banning food exports or hoarding grain while so many people are suffering. Because in every country in the world, no matter what else divides us, if parents cannot feed their children, nothing—nothing else matters if parents cannot feed their children.
As we look to the future, we’re working with our partners to update and create rules of the road for new challenges we face in the 21st century.
We launched the Trade and Technology Council with the European Union to ensure that key technologies—key technologies are developed and governed in the way that benefits everyone. 
With our partner countries and through the U.N., we’re supporting and strengthening the norms of responsibility—responsible state behavior in cyberspace and working to hold accountable those who use cyberattacks to threaten international peace and security. 
With partners in the Americas, Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, and the Indo-Pacific, we’re working to build a new economic ecosystem while—where every nation—every nation gets a fair shot and economic growth is resilient, sustainable, and shared. 
That’s why the United States has championed a global minimum tax. And we will work to see it implemented so major corporations pay their fair share everywhere—everywhere.
It’s also been the idea behind the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework, which the United States launched this year with 13 other Indo-Pacific economies. We’re working with our partners in ASEAN and the Pacific Islands to support a vision for a critical Indo-Pacific region that is free and open, connected and prosperous, secure and resilient.
Together with partners around the world, we’re working to secure resilient supply chains that protect everyone from coercion or domination and ensure that no country can use energy as a weapon.
And as Russia’s war rolls the global economy, we’re also calling on major global creditors, including the non-Paris Club countries, to transparently negotiate debt forgiveness for lower-income countries to forestall broader economic and political crises around the world. 
Instead of infrastructure projects that generate huge and large debt without delivering on the promised advantages, let’s meet the enormous infrastructure needs around the world with transparent investments—high-standard projects that protect the rights of workers and the environment—keyed to the needs of the communities they serve, not to the contributor.
That’s why the United States, together with fellow G7 partners, launched a Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment. We intend to collectively mobilize $600 billion in investment through this partnership by 2027. 
Dozens of projects are already underway: industrial-scale vaccine manufacturing in Senegal, transformative solar projects in Angola, first-of-its-kind small modular nuclear power plant in Romania.
These are investments that are going to deliver returns not just for those countries, but for everyone. The United States will work with every nation, including our competitors, to solve global problems like climate change. Climate diplomacy is not a favor to the United States or any other nation, and walking away hurts the entire world.
Let me be direct about the competition between the United States and China. As we manage shifting geopolitical trends, the United States will conduct itself as a reasonable leader. We do not seek conflict. We do not seek a Cold War. We do not ask any nation to choose between the United States or any other partner. 
But the United States will be unabashed in promoting our vision of a free, open, secure, and prosperous world and what we have to offer communities of nations: investments that are designed not to foster dependency, but to alleviate burdens and help nations become self-sufficient; partnerships not to create political obligation, but because we know our own success—each of our success is increased when other nations succeed as well.
When individuals have the chance to live in dignity and develop their talents, everyone benefits. Critical to that is living up to the highest goals of this institution: increasing peace and security for everyone, everywhere. 
The United States will not waver in our unrelenting determination to counter and thwart the continuing terrorist threats to our world. And we will lead with our diplomacy to strive for peaceful resolution of conflicts. 
We seek to uphold peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits. 
We remain committed to our One China policy, which has helped prevent conflict for four decades. And we continue to oppose unilateral changes in the status quo by either side. 
We support an African Union-led peace process to end the fight in Ethiopia and restore security for all its people. 
In Venezuela, where years of the political oppression have driven more than 6 million people from that country, we urge a Venezuelan-led dialogue and a return to free and fair elections.
We continue to stand with our neighbor in Haiti as it faces political-fueled gang violence and an enormous human crisis.
And we call on the world to do the same. We have more to do. 
We’ll continue to back the U.N.-mediated truce in Yemen, which has delivered precious months of peace to people that have suffered years of war.
And we will continue to advocate for lasting negotiating peace between the Jewish and democratic state of Israel and the Palestinian people. The United States is committed to Israel’s security, full stop. And a negotiated two-state solution remains, in our view, the best way to ensure Israel’s security and prosperity for the future and give the Palestinians the state which—to which they are entitled—both sides to fully respect the equal rights of their citizens; both people enjoying equal measure of freedom and dignity.
Let me also urge every nation to recommit to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime through diplomacy. No matter what else is happening in the world, the United States is ready to pursue critical arms control measures. A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. 
The five permanent members of the Security Council just reaffirmed that commitment in January. But today, we’re seeing disturbing trends. Russia shunned the Non-Proliferation ideals embraced by every other nation at the 10th NPT Review Conference. 
And again, today, as I said, they’re making irresponsible nuclear threats to use nuclear weapons. China is conducting an unprecedented, concerning nuclear buildup without any transparency. 
Despite our efforts to begin serious and sustained diplomacy, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to blatantly violate U.N. sanctions.
And while the United States is prepared for a mutual return to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action if Iran steps up to its obligations, the United States is clear: We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.
I continue to believe that diplomacy is the best way to achieve this outcome. The nonproliferation regime is one of the greatest successes of this institution. We cannot let the world now slide backwards, nor can we turn a blind eye to the erosion of human rights.
Perhaps singular among this body’s achievements stands the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is the standard by which our forebears challenged us to measure ourselves.
They made clear in 1948: Human rights are the basis for all that we seek to achieve. And yet today, in 2022, fundamental freedoms are at risk in every part of our world, from the violations of—in Xinjiang detailed in recent reports by the Office of U.N.—U.S.—reports detailing by the U.S. [U.N.] High Commissioner, to the horrible abuses against pro-democracy activists and ethnic minorities by the military regime in Burma, to the increased repression of women and girls by the Taliban in Afghanistan.
And today, we stand with the brave citizens and the brave women of Iran who right now are demonstrating to secure their basic rights.
But here’s what I know: The future will be won by those countries that unleash the full potential of their populations, where women and girls can exercise equal rights, including basic reproductive rights, and contribute fully to building a stronger economies and more resilient societies; where religious and ethnic minorities can live their lives without harassment and contribute to the fabric of their communities; where the LGBTQ+ community individuals live and love freely without being targeted with violence; where citizens can question and criticize their leaders without fear of reprisal.
The United States will always promote human rights and the values enshrined in the U.N. Charter in our own country and around the world.
Let me end with this: This institution, guided by the U.N. Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, is at its core an act of dauntless hope.
Let me say that again: It’s an act of dauntless hope.
Think about the vision of those first delegates who undertook a seemingly impossible task while the world was still smoldering.
Think about how divided the people of the world must have felt with the fresh grief of millions dead, the genocidal horrors of the Holocaust exposed.
They had every right to believe only the worst of humanity. Instead, they reached for what was best in all of us, and they strove to build something better: enduring peace; comity among nations; equal rights for every member of the human family; cooperation for the advancement of all humankind.
My fellow leaders, the challenges we face today are great indeed, but our capacity is greater. Our commitment must be greater still.
So let’s stand together to again declare the unmistakable resolve that nations of the world are united still, that we stand for the values of the U.N. Charter, that we still believe by working together we can bend the arc of history toward a freer and more just world for all our children, although none of us have fully achieved it.
We’re not passive witnesses to history; we are the authors of history.
We can do this—we have to do it—for ourselves and for our future, for humankind.
Thank you for your tolerance, for listening to me. I appreciate it very much. God bless you all. 


View Transcriptthank you. (applause.) (inaudible) mike asked me — and i said to bobby, my good friend — he asked me back there — he said, “do you ever get nervous?” and i — he said, “because i got up this morning, made breakfast for my kids. i’ve got to introduce the president.’” and what i say to you, mike: you did a heck of a job. but i’d get nervous if i had to get up in the middle of the night, climb up a telephone pole, replace — in the middle of a storm — a connection that knocked out everybody’s electricity, and put a transformer in. that’s what would make me nervous. so what you did was really good. i couldn’t do what you do, pal. i couldn’t do what you do. and i want to — and it’s true, mike. you’re a union guy; me too. i got in trouble, but i don’t make any apologies for it. i’m a union guy. i support unions. unions built the middle class. it’s about time they start to get a piece of the action. to all my colleagues — (applause) — to the county executives, to the mayor, to everyone who’s here, i want to say: thank you. thank you, congressman, for the passport into your district. and i appreciate being here. i’m honored to be with you. two years ago, i began my campaign here in pittsburgh, saying i was running to rebuild the backbone of america. and today, i return as your president to lay out the vision of how i believe we do that — rebuild the backbone of america. it’s a vision not seen through the eyes of wall street or washington, but through the eyes of hardworking people, like the people i grew up with; people like mike and his union family; union workers in this carpenters training center; people like the folks i grew up with in scranton and claymont, delaware. people who get up every day, work hard, raise their family, pay their taxes, serve their country, and volunteer for their communities, and just looking for a little bit of breathing room — just a little bit of light. ordinary americans doing extraordinary things. the people who break their necks every day for their families and the country they love — a country that, in fact — which, on the day i was elected, was in extreme distress with a virus on a deadly rampage that has now killed four thou- — excuse me, five hundred — i carry it in my pocket every day. i have the list of exactly how many have died: 547,296 americans dead from the virus — more than all the people killed in world war one, world war two, the vietnam war, 9/11. 547,296 americans. and an economy that left millions out of work and created so much anxiety. that’s why i moved so quickly to pass the american rescue plan with the help of my friends here in the congress. i really mean that. it didn’t pass by a whole lot, but with the leadership of conor and bobby and mayor — just — you got it done, because it was an emergency. we needed to act to save jobs, to save businesses, and to save lives. and that’s what we did. we’re beginning to see the results. we’re on our way to having given 200 million vaccination shots in the first 100 days of my presidency. when i said i’d get 100 million done, people thought it was a significant exaggeration. we’re going to get 200 million done — twice the original goal — because of all the help of all of you. leading economists are now predicting our economy will grow 6 percent this year. that’s a rate we haven’t seen in years and years. we can cut child poverty in half this year. with the american rescue plan, we’re meeting immediate emergencies. now it’s time to rebuild. even before the crisis we’re now facing, those at the very top in america were doing very well, which is fine. they were doing great. but everyone else was falling behind. the pandemic only made the division so much worse and more obvious. millions of americans lost their jobs last year while the wealthiest 1 percent of americans saw their net worth increase by $4 trillion. it just goes to show you how distorted and unfair our economy has become. it wasn’t always this way. well, it’s time to change that. i’d note, parenthetically, that i got criticized for giving tax breaks to middle-class and poor folks this last time. i didn’t hear that cry — hue and cry when we were doing the same thing when trump’s tax bill passed and 83 percent of the money went to the top 1 percent. you know, this is not to target those who’ve made it; not to seek retribution. this is about opening opportunities for everybody else. and here’s the truth: we all will do better when we all do well. it’s time to build our economy from the bottom up and from the middle out, not the top down. it hadn’t worked very well. for the economy overall, it hadn’t worked — because wall street didn’t build this country; you, the great middle class, built this country. and unions built the middle class. (applause.) and it’s time — in this time, we’ll rebuild the middle class. we’re going to bring everybody along. regardless of your background, your color, your religion, (inaudible) everybody gets to come along. so, today, i’m proposing a plan for the nation that rewards work, not just rewards wealth. it builds a fair economy that gives everybody a chance to succeed, and it’s going to create the strongest, most resilient, innovative economy in the world. it’s not a plan that tinkers around the edges. it’s a once-in-a generation investment in america, unlike anything we’ve seen or done since we built the interstate highway system and the space race decades ago. in fact, it’s the largest american jobs investment since world war two. it will create millions of jobs, good-paying jobs. it will grow the economy, make us more competitive around the world, promote our national security interests, and put us in a position to win the global competition with china in the upcoming years. is it big? yes. is it bold? yes. and we can get it done. it has two parts: the american jobs plan and the american families plan. both are essential to our economic future. in a few weeks, i’ll talk about the americans family plan, but today i want to talk about the americans jobs plan. i’ll begin with the heart of the plan: it modernizes transportation infrastructure — our roads, our bridges, our airports. i just left your airport. the director of the airport said, “we’re about to renovate the airport.” is that right, mr. county executive? “we’re going to renovate. we’re going to employ thousands of people.” and she looked at me and said, “i can’t thank you enough for this plan.” it grows the economy in key ways. it puts people to work to repair and upgrade so — that we badly need. it makes it easier and more efficient to move goods, to get to work, and to make us more competitive around the world. some of your local officials know, when someone wants to come into the area and a company wants to invest, what do they ask? “where’s the first rail bed? how can i get to the railroad? what access to interstate do i have? what’s the water like? tell me about it.” and it goes on and on. it’s about infrastructure. the american jobs plan will modernize 20,000 miles of highways, roads, and main streets that are in difficult, difficult shape right now. it’ll fix the nation’s 10 most economically significant bridges in america that require replacement. remember that bridge that went down? we got 10 of the most economically significant bridges with more commerce going across it that need to be replaced. we’ll also repair 10,000 bridges, desperately needed upgrades to unclog traffic, keep people safe, and connect our cities, towns, and tribes across the country. the american jobs plan will build new rail corridors and transit lines, easing congestion, cutting pollution, slashing commute times, and opening up investment in communities that can be connected to the cities, and cities to the outskirts, where a lot of jobs are these days. it’ll reduce the bottlenecks of commerce at our ports and our airports. the american jobs plan will lead to a transformational progress in our effort to tackle climate change with american jobs and american ingenuity. it’ll protect our community from billions of dollars of damage from historic super storms, floods, wildfires, droughts, year after year, by making our infrastructure more secure and resilient and seizing incredible opportunities for american workers and american farmers in a clean energy future. skilled workers, like one we just heard from, building a nationwide network of 500,000 charging stations, creating good-paying jobs by leading the world in the manufacturing and export of clean electric cars and trucks. we’re going to provide tax incentives and point-of-sale reberts [sic] — rebates to help all american families afford clean vehicles of the future. the federal government owns an enormous fleet of vehicles which are going to be transitioned to clean electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles right here in the united states, by american workers with american products. when we make all these investments, we’re going to make sure, as the executive order i signed early on, that we buy american. that means investing in american-based companies and american workers. not a contract will go out, that i control, that will not go to a company that is an american company with american products, all the way down the line, and american workers. and we’ll buy the goods we need from all of america, communities that have historically been left out of these investments: black, latino, asian american, native american, rural, small businesses, entrepreneurs across the country. look, today, up to 10 million homes in america and more than 400,000 schools and childcare centers have pipes — where they get their water from — pipes that are lead-based pipes, including pipes for drinking water. according to scientists, there is simply no safe exposure to lead for a child. lead can slow development, cause learning behaviors and hearing problems. the american jobs plan will put plumbers and pipefitters to work, replacing 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines so every american, every child can turn on a faucet or a fountain and drink clean water. with each $5,000 investment replacing a line, that can mean up to $22,000 in healthcare costs saved — a chance to protect our children, help them learn and thrive. we can’t delay. we can’t delay another minute. it’s long past due. you know, in america, where the early interest was in internet — this thing called the internet that we invested — we invented, the early — the early internet was invented here. millions of americans, though, lack access to reliable high-speed internet, including more than 35 percent of rural america. it’s a disparity even more pronounced during this pandemic. american jobs will make sure every single — every single american has access to high quality, affordable, high-speed internet for businesses, for schools. and when i say “affordable,” i mean it. americans pay too much for internet service. we’re going to drive down the price for families who have service now, and make it easier for families who don’t have affordable service to be able to get it now. as you saw in texas and elsewhere, our electric and power — power grids are vulnerable to storms, catastrophic failures, and security lapses, with tragic results. my american jobs plan will put hundreds of thousands of people to work — hundred of thousands of people to work — line workers, electricians, and laborers — laying thousands of miles of transmission line; building a modern, resilient, and fully clean grid; and capping hundreds of thousands of, literally, orphan oil and gas wells that need to be cleaned up because they’re abandoned — paying the same exact rate that a union man or woman would get having dug that well in the first place. we’ll build, upgrade, and weatherize affordable, energy-efficient housing and commercial buildings for millions of americans. even before the pandemic, millions of working families faced enormous — enormous financial and personal strain trying to raise their kids and care for their parents at the same time — the so-called “sandwich generation” — or family members with disability. you got a child at home, you can’t stay home from work to take care of that child unless you lose — you’re going to put the child at risk or you lose your job; or you have an elderly parent you’re taking care of. and seniors and people with disabilities living independently feel that strain as well. but we know, if they can remain independently living, they live longer. the american jobs plan is going to help in big ways. it’s going to extend access to quality, affordable home or community-based care. think of expanded vital services like programs for seniors, or think of homecare workers going into homes of seniors and people with disabilities, cooking meals, helping them get around their homes, and helping them be able to live more independently. for too long, caregivers — who are disproportionately women, and women of color, and immigrants — have been unseen, underpaid, and undervalued. this plan, along with the american families plan, changes that with better wages, benefits, and opportunities for millions of people who will be able to get to work in an economy that works for them. you know, decades ago, the united states government used to spend 2 percent of its gdp — its gross domestic product — on research and development. today, we spend less than 1 percent. i think it’s seven-tenths of 1 percent. here’s why that matters: we’re one of only a few major economies in the world whose public investment in research and development as a share of gdp has declined constantly over the last 25 years. and we’ve fallen back. the rest of the world is closing in and closing in fast. we can’t allow this to continue. the american jobs plan is the biggest increase in our federal non-defense research and development spending on record. it’s going to boost america’s innovative edge in markets where global leadership is up for grabs — markets like battery technology, biotechnology, computer chips, clean energy, the competition with china in particular. critics say we shouldn’t spend this money. they ask, “what do we get out of it?” well, they said the same thing when we first flew into space for the first time. they said the same thing. well, pushing the frontiers led to big benefits back home. when nasa created apollo’s digital flight control system — unheard of at the time — it led to technologies that help us today to drive our cars and fly our planes. when nasa invented ways to keep food safe for the astronauts, it led to programs that have been used to — for decades to keep food safe in supermarkets. at least 2,000 products and services have been developed and commercialized as a result of american space exploration. gps has helped us find each other. computer chips allow us to see and talk to one another, even when we’re separated by mountains and oceans — singing “happy birthday” and watching the first steps of that new baby grandchild; comforting each other when comfort is needed. think about what it means to you and your loved ones. we just have to imagine again. i had a long discussion with xi jinping, the leader of china, when he called to congratulate me. we spent two hours on the phone. and he said — and was astonished by nasa’s security team and the china experts who were on the line — he said, “you’ve always said, mr. president, that you can define america in one word: possibilities.” that’s who we are. in america, anything is possible. like what we did with vaccines a decade ago that laid the foundation for covid-19 vaccines we have today. like we did when the interstate highway system that transformed the way we traveled, lived, worked, and developed. americans could visit relatives anywhere in the country with just a family station wagon. businesses here in pittsburgh could load up a truck and get a product to portland or phoenix. to this day, about a quarter of all the miles americans drive each year on one of those very original highways. imagine what we can do, what’s within our reach, when we modernize those highways. you and your family could travel coast to coast without a single tank of gas onboard a high-speed train. we can connect high-speed, affordable, reliable internet wherever you live. imagine knowing that you’re handing your children and grandchildren a country that will lead the world in producing clean energy technology and will need to address one of the biggest threats of our time. that’s what we’ll do. altogether, along with the american rescue plan, the proposal i put forward will create millions of jobs — estimated by some wall street outfits: over 18 million jobs over four years; good-paying jobs. it also works to level the playing field, empower workers, and ensure that the new jobs are good jobs that you can raise a family on, and ensure free and fair choice to organize and bargain collectively. that’s why my plan asked congress to pass the protecting the right to organize act — the pro act — and send it to my desk. this plan is important, not only for what and how it builds, but it’s also important to where we build. it includes everyone, regardless of your race or your zip code. too often, economic growth and recovery is concentrated on the coast. too often, investments have failed to meet the needs of marginalized communities left behind. there is talent, innovation everywhere. and this plan connects that talent through cities, small towns, rural communities; through our businesses and our universities; through our entrepreneurs, union workers all across america. we have to move now. because i’m convinced that if we act now, in 50 years, people are going to look back and say this was the moment that america won the future. what i’m proposing is a one-time capital investment of roughly $2 trillion in america’s future, spread largely over eight years. it will generate historic job growth, historic economic growth, help businesses to compete internationally, create more revenue as well. they are among the highest-value investments we can make in the nation — investing in our infrastructure. but put it another way, failing to make these investments adds to our debt and effectively puts our children at a disadvantage relative to our competitors. that’s what crumbling infrastructure does. and our infrastructure is crumbling. we’re ranked 13th in the world. what’s more, it heightens our vulnerability to — it attac- — attracts our adversaries to compete in ways that they haven’t up to now. and our adversaries are worried about us building this critical infrastructure. put simply, these are investments we have to make. we can afford to make them — or, put another way, we can’t afford not to. so how do we pay for it? i spoke to the majority leader and — no longer — i guess he’s no longer the majority leader; he has been for a long time. i spoke for the republican — i spoke to the republican leader about the plan. everybody is for doing something on infrastructure. why haven’t we done it? well, no one wants to pay for it. less than four years ago, as i said, the congress passed a tax cut of $2 trillion, increasing the national debt $2 trillion. it didn’t meet virtually any of the predictions it would in terms of growing the economy. overwhelmingly, the benefits of that tax package went to the wealthiest americans. it even included new investments that would profit by shifting profits and jobs overseas if you’re a corporation. it was bad for american competitiveness, deeply unfair to the middle-class families, and wrong for our future. so, here’s what i’d do. i start with one rule: no one — let me say it again — no one making under $400,000 will see their federal taxes go up. period. this is not about penalizing anyone. i have nothing against millionaires and billionaires. i believe american — in american capitalism. i want everyone to do well. but here’s the deal: right now, a middle-class couple — a firefighter and a teacher with two kids — making a combined salary of, say, $110-, $120,000 a year pays 22 cents for each additional dollar they earn in federal income tax. but a multinational corporation that builds a factory abroad — brings it home and then sell it — they pay nothing at all. we’re going to raise the corporate tax. it was 35 percent, which is too high. we all agreed, five years ago, it should go down to 28 percent, but they reduced it to 21 percent. we’re going to raise it back to — up to 28 percent. no one should be able to complain about that. it’s still lower than what that rate was between world war two and 2017. just doing that one thing will generate $1 trillion in additional revenue over 15 years. in 2019, an independent analysis found that are 91 — let me say it again, 91 fortune 500 companies — the biggest companies in the world, including amazon — they used various loopholes so they’d pay not a single solitary penny in federal income tax. i don’t want to punish them, but that’s just wrong. that’s just wrong. a fireman and a teacher paying 22 percent? amazon and 90 other major corporations are paying zero in federal taxes? i’m going to put an end to that, and here’s how we’ll do it. we’re establishing a global minimum tax for u.s. corporations of 21 percent. we’re going to level the international playing field. that alone will raise $1 trillion over 15 years. we’ll also eliminate deductions by corporations for offshoring jobs and shifting assets overseas. you do that, you pay a penalty; you don’t get a reward in my plan. and use the savings from that to give companies tax credits to locate manufacturing here — in manufacturing and production here in the united states. and we’ll significantly ramp up the irs enforcement against corporations who either fail to report their incomes or under-report. it’s estimated that could raise hundreds of billions of dollars. all of this adds up to more than what i’ve proposed to spend in just 15 years. it’s honest. it’s fiscally responsible. and by the way, as the experts will tell you, it reduces the debt — the federal debt over the long haul. but let me be clear: these are my ideas on how to pay for this plan. if others have additional ideas, let them come forward. i’m open to other ideas, so long as they do not impose any tax increase on people making less than $400,000. let me close with this: historically, infrastructure had been a bipartisan undertaking, many times led by republicans. it was abraham lincoln who built the transcontinental railroad. dwight eisenhower, a republican — the interstate highway system. i could go on. and i don’t think you’ll find a republican today in the house or senate — maybe i’m wrong, gentlemen — who doesn’t think we have to improve our infrastructure. they know china and other countries are eating our lunch. so there’s no reason why it can’t be bipartisan again. the divisions of the moment shouldn’t stop us from doing the right thing for the future. i’m going to bring republicans into the oval office; listen to them, what they have to say; and be open to other ideas. we’ll have a good-faith negotiation with any republican who wants to help get this done. but we have to get it done. i truly believe we’re in a moment where history is going to look back on this time as a fundamental choice that had to be made between democracies and autocracies. you know, there’s a lot of autocrats in the world who think the reason why they’re going to win is democracies can’t reach consensus any longer; autocracies do. that’s what competition between america and china and the rest of the world is all about. it’s a basic question: can democracies still deliver for their people? can they get a majority? i believe we can. i believe we must. delivering for the american people is what the american rescue plan was all about. and it’s been overwhelmingly popular. when i wrote it, everybody said i had no bipartisan support. we’re overwhelming bipartisan support with republican — registered republican voters. and ask around. if you live in a town with a republican mayor, a republican county executive, or a republican governor, ask them how many would rather get rid of the plan. ask them if it helped them at all. it’s what the american jobs plan is about — the new one i’m proposing. i hope republicans in congress will join this effort. i hope and i believe a number of businesses will join this effort. and i hope and believe the american people will join this effort — democrats, republican, and independents. we can do this. we have to do this. we will do this. we just have to remember: this is the united states of america. and i’ve said it a thousand times: there’s nothing beyond our capacity if we act together. so it’s time to move together. thank you and i hope i get to come back to see you folks after this plan is passed. and the question is: you have to attract even more apprentices, more people, because we’re building so much. god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you. (applause.) been a tough day. this evening in kabul, as you all know, terrorists attacked—that we’ve been talking about and worried about, that the intelligence community has assessed has [was] undertaken—an attack—by a group known as isis-k—took the lives of american service members standing guard at the airport, and wounded several others seriously. they also wounded a number of civilians, and civilians were killed as well. i’ve been engaged all day and in constant contact with the military commanders here in washington, the pentagon, as well as in afghanistan and doha. and my commanders here in washington and in the field have been on this with great detail, and you’ve had a chance to speak to some, so far. the situation on the ground is still evolving, and i’m constantly being updated. these american service members who gave their lives—it’s an overused word, but it’s totally appropriate—they were heroes. heroes who have been engaged in a dangerous, selfless mission to save the lives of others. they were part of an airlift, an evacuation effort unlike any seen in history, with more than 100,000 american citizens, american partners, afghans who helped us, and others taken to safety in the last 11 days. just in the last 12 hours or so, another 7,000 have gotten out. they were part of the bravest, most capable, and the most selfless military on the face of the earth. and they were part of, simply, what i call the “backbone of america.” they’re the spine of america, the best the country has to offer. jill and i—our hearts ache, like i’m sure all of you do as well, for all those afghan families who have lost loved ones, including small children, or been wounded in this vicious attack. and we’re outraged as well as heartbroken. being the father of an army major who served for a year in iraq and, before that, was in kosovo as a u.s. attorney for the better part of six months in the middle of a war—when he came home after a year in iraq, he was diagnosed, like many, many coming home, with an aggressive and lethal cancer of the brain—who we lost. we have some sense, like many of you do, what the families of these brave heroes are feeling today. you get this feeling like you’re being sucked into a black hole in the middle of your chest; there’s no way out. my heart aches for you. but i know this: we have a continuing obligation, a sacred obligation to all of you—the families of those heroes. that obligation is not temporary; it lasts forever. the lives we lost today were lives given in the service of liberty, the service of security, in the service of others, in the service of america. like their fellow brothers and sisters in arms who died defending our vision and our values in the struggle against terrorism of—the fallen this day, they’re part of a great and noble company of american heroes. to those who carried out this attack, as well as anyone who wishes america harm, know this: we will not forgive. we will not forget. we will hunt you down and make you pay. i will defend our interests and our people with every measure at my command. over the past few weeks—i know you’re—many of you are probably tired of hearing me say it—we’ve been made aware by our intelligence community that the isis-k—an arch-enemy of the taliban; people who were freed when both those prisons were opened—has been planning a complex set of attacks on the united states personnel and others. this is why, from the outset, i’ve repeatedly said this mission was extraordinarily dangerous and why i have been so determined to limit the duration of this mission. and as general mckenzie said, this is why our mission was designed—this is the way it was designed to operate: operate under severe stress and attack. we’ve known that from the beginning. and as i’ve been in constant contact with our senior military leaders—and i mean constant, around the clock—and our commanders on the ground and throughout the day, they made it clear that we can and we must complete this mission, and we will. and that’s what i’ve ordered them to do. we will not be deterred by terrorists. we will not let them stop our mission. we will continue the evacuation. i’ve also ordered my commanders to develop operational plans to strike isis-k assets, leadership, and facilities. we will respond with force and precision at our time, at the place we choose, and the moment of our choosing. here is what you need to know: these isis terrorists will not win. we will rescue the americans who are there. we will get out our afghan allies out, and our mission will go on. america will not be intimidated. i have the utmost confidence in our brave service members who continue to execute this mission with courage and honor to save lives and get americans, our partners, our afghan allies out of afghanistan. every day when i talk to our commanders, i ask them what they need—what more do they need, if anything, to get the job done. as they will tell you, i granted every request. i reiterated to them again today, on three occasions, that they should take the maximum steps necessary to protect our forces on the ground in kabul. and i also want to thank the secretary of defense and the military leadership at the pentagon, and all the commanders in the field. there has been complete unanimity from every commander on the objectives of this mission and the best way to achieve those objectives. those who have served through the ages have drawn inspiration from the book of isaiah, when the lord says, “whom shall i send…who shall go for us?” and the american military has been answering for a long time: “here am i, lord. send me.” “here i am. send me.” each one of these women and men of our armed forces are the heirs of that tradition of sacrifice of volunteering to go into harm’s way, to risk everything—not for glory, not for profit, but to defend what we love and the people we love. and i ask that you join me now in a moment of silence for all those in uniform and out uniform—military and civilian, who have given the last full measure of devotion. (a moment of silence is taken.) thank you. may god bless you all. and may god protect those troops and all those standing watch for america. we have so much to do. it’s within our capacity to do it. we just have to remain steadfast. steadfast. we will complete our mission. and we will continue, after our troops have withdrawn, to find means by which we defined any american who wishes to get out of afghanistan. we will find them and we will get them out. ladies and gentlemen, they gave me a list here. the first person i was instructed to call on was kelly o’donnell of nbc. q mr. president, you have said leaving afghanistan is in the national interest of the united states. after today’s attack, do you believe you will authorize additional forces to respond to that attack inside afghanistan? and are you—are you prepared to add additional forces to protect those americans who remain on the ground carrying out the evacuation operation? i’ve instructed the military, whatever they need—if they need additional force—i will grant it. but the military—from the chairman of the joint chiefs, the joint chiefs, the commanders in the field—have all contacted me one way or another, usually by letter, saying they subscribe to the mission as designed to get as many people out as we can within the timeframe that is allotted. that is the best way, they believe, to get as many americans out as possible, and others. and with regard to finding, tracking down the isis leaders who ordered this, we have some reason to believe we know who they are—not certain—and we will find ways of our choosing, without large military operations, to get them. wherever they are. trevor from reuters. no, i don’t. look, i think general mckenzie handled this question very well. the fact is that we’re in a situation—we inherited a situation, particularly since, as we all know, that the afghan military collapsed 11 days before—in 11 days—that it is in the interest of, as mackenzie said, in the interest of the taliban that, in fact, isis-k does not metastasize beyond what it is, number one. and number two, it’s in their interest that we are able to leave on time, on target. as a consequence of that, the major things we’ve asked them—moving back the perimeter; give me more space between the wall; stopping vehicles from coming through, et cetera; searching people coming through—it is not what you’d call a tightly commanded, regimented operation like the u.s. is—the military is—but they’re acting in their interest—their interest. and so, by and large—and i’ve asked this same question to military on the ground, whether or not it’s a useful exercise. no one trusts them; we’re just counting on their self-interest to continue to generate their activities. and it’s in their self-interest that we leave when we said and that we get as many people out as we can. and like i said, even in the midst of everything that happened today, over 7,000 people have gotten out; over 5,000 americans overall. so, it’s not a matter of trust, it’s a matter of mutual self-interest. and—but there is no evidence thus far that i’ve been given, as a consequence by any of our commanders in the field, that there has been collusion between the taliban and isis in carrying out what happened today both in front of the hotel and what is expected to continue for—beyond today. aamer, associated press. because i think what america says matters. what we say we’re going to do and the context in which we say we’re going to do it, that we do it—unless something exceptional changes. there are additional american citizens, there are additional green card holders, there are additional personnel of our allies, there are additional siv card holders, there are additional afghans that have helped us, and there are additional groups of individuals that have contacted us from women’s groups, to ngos, and others, who have expressly indicated they want to get out and have gathered in certain circumstances in groups, on buses and other means, that still presents the opportunity for the next several days, between now and the 31st, to be able to get them out. and our military—and, i believe, to the extent that we can do that knowing the threat, knowing that we may very well have another attack—the military has concluded that’s what we should do. i think they’re right. i think they’re correct. and after that, we’re going to be in a circumstance where there are—will be, i believe, numerous opportunities to continue to provide access for additional persons to get out of afghanistan, either through means that we provide and/or are provided through cooperation with the taliban. they’re not good guys, the taliban. i’m not suggesting that at all. but they have a keen interest. as many of you have been reporting, they very much would like to figure out how to keep the airport open. they don’t have the capacity to do it. they very much are trying to figure out whether or not they can maintain what is the portion of an economy that has become not robust, but fundamentally different than it had been. and so there’s a lot of reasons why they have reached out not just to us, but to others, as to why it would be continued in their interest to get more of the personnel we want to get out. we can locate them. now, there’s not many left that we can assess that are—want to come out. there’s some americans we’ve identified—we’ve contacted the vast majority of them, if not all of them—who don’t want to leave because they have sig-—they’re dual nationals, they have extended families, et cetera. and there’s others who are looking for the time. so, that’s why we continue. i’ll take a few more questions, and—but, you, sir. i didn’t pick you, but that’s okay. (laughs.) i say — —we’re going to continue to try to get you out. it matters. look, i know of no conflict, as a student of history—no conflict where, when a war was ending, one side was able to guarantee that everyone that wanted to be extracted from that country would get out. and think about it, folks. i think it’s important for—i know the american people get this in their gut. there are, i would argue, millions of afghani citizens who are not taliban; who did not actively cooperate with us as sivs; who, if given a chance, they’d be onboard a plane tomorrow. it sounds ridiculous, but the vast majority of people in communities like that want to come to america, given a choice. so, getting every single person out is—can’t be guaranteed to anybody because there’s a determination, all who wants to get out as well. at any rate, it’s a process. i was really pointing to you, but—you, sir. here’s what i’ve done on the—ask this—i’ll answer the last question, first. on the tactical questions of how to conduct an evacuation or a war, i gather up all the major military personnel that are in afghanistan—the commanders, as well as the pentagon. and i ask for their best military judgment: what would be the most efficient way to accomplish the mission. they concluded—the military—that bagram was not much value added, that it was much wiser to focus on kabul. and so, i followed that recommendation. with regard to—there are certain circumstances where we’ve gotten information—and quite frankly, sometimes from some of you—saying, “you know of such and such a group of people who are trying to get out and they’re on a bus, they’re moving…”—from other people—“and this is their location.” and there have been occasions when our military has contacted their military counterparts in the taliban and said, “this…”—for example, “this bus is coming through with x number of people on it, made up of the following group of people. we want you to let that bus or that group through.” so, yes, there have been occasions like that. and to the best of my knowledge, in those cases, the bulk of that has occurred—they’ve been let through. but i can’t tell you with any certitude that there’s actually been a list of names. i don’t—there may have been, but i know of no circumstance. it doesn’t mean it’s not—it didn’t exist, that, “here’s the names of 12 people; they’re coming. let them through.” it could very well have happened. i’ll take one more question. whoa. wait, wait, wait. let me take the one question from the most interesting guy that i know in the press. that’s you. (laughter.) i bear responsibility for, fundamentally, all that’s happened of late. but here’s the deal: you know—i wish you’d one day say these things—you know as well as i do that the former president made a deal with the taliban that he would get all american forces out of afghanistan by may 1. in return, the commitment was made—and that was a year before—in return, he was given a commitment that the taliban would continue to attack others, but would not attack any american forces. remember that? i’m being serious. no, i—i’m asking you a question. be a—because before i — no, no—now wait a minute. i’m asking you a question. is that—is that accurate, to the best of your knowledge? what? i think they have an issue that people are likely to get hurt—some, as we’ve seen, have gotten killed—and that it is messy. the reason why—whether my friend will acknowledge it and was—reported it—the reason why there were no attacks on americans, as you said, from the date until i came into office, was because the commitment was made by president trump: “i will be out by may 1st. in the meantime, you agree not to attack any americans.” that was the deal. that’s why no american was attacked. yes, i do. because look at it this way, folks—and i’m going to—i have another meeting, for real. but imagine where we’d be if i had indicated, on may the 1st, i was not going to renegotiate an evacuation date; we were going to stay there. i’d have only one alternative: pour thousands of more troops back into afghanistan to fight a war that we had already won, relative—is why the reason we went in the first place. i have never been of the view that we should be sacrificing american lives to try to establish a democratic government in afghanistan—a country that has never once in its entire history been a united country, and is made up—and i don’t mean this in a derogatory—made up of different tribes who have never, ever, ever gotten along with one another. and so, as i said before—and this is the last comment i’ll make, but we’ll have more chance to talk about this, unfortunately, beyond, because we’re not out yet—if osama bin laden, as well as al qaeda, had chosen to launch an attack—when they left saudi arabia—out of yemen, would we have ever gone to afghanistan? even though the taliban completely controlled afghanistan at the time, would we have ever gone? i know it’s not fair to ask you questions. it’s rhetorical. but raise your hand if you think we should have gone and given up thousands of lives and tens of thousands of wounded. our interest in going was to prevent al qaeda from reemerging—first to get bin laden, wipe out al qaeda in afghanistan, and prevent that from happening again. as i’ve said 100 times: terrorism has metastasized around the world; we have greater threats coming out of other countries a heck of a lot closer to the united states. we don’t have military encampments there; we don’t keep people there. we have over-the-horizon capability to keep them from going after us. ladies and gentlemen, it was time to end a 20-year war. thank you so much. my fellow americans, i am speaking to you tonight from the oval office.before i begin, let me speak to important news from earlier today. after eight months of nonstop negotiation, my administration—by my administration, a ceasefire and a hostage deal has been reached by israel and hamas, the elements of which i laid out in great detail in may of this year.this plan was developed and negotiated by my team and will be largely implemented by the incoming administration. that’s why i told my team to keep the incoming administration fully informed, because that’s how it should be: working together as americans.this will be my final address to you, the american people, from the oval office, from this desk as president. and i’ve been thinking a lot about who we are and, maybe more importantly, who we should be.long ago, in new york harbor, an ironworker installed beam after beam, day after day. he was joined by steelworkers, stone masons, engineers. they built not just a single structure but a beacon of freedom.the very idea of america was so big, we felt the entire world needed to see the statue of liberty, a gift from france after our civil war. like the very idea of america, it was built not by one person but by many people, from every background and from around the world.like america, the statue of liberty is not standing still. her foot literally steps forward atop a broken chain of human bondage. she’s on the march, and she literally moves. she was built to sway back and forth to withstand the fury of stormy weather, to stand the test of time, because storms are always coming. she sways a few inches, but she never falls into the current below—an engineering marvel.the statue of liberty is also an enduring symbol of the soul of our nation, a soul shaped by forces that bring us together and by forces that pull us apart. and yet, through good times and tough times, we’ve withstood it all.a nation of pioneers and explorers, of dreamers and doers, of ancestors native to this land, of ancestors who came by force, a nation of immigrants who came to build a better life, a nation holding the torch of the most powerful idea ever in the history of the world that all of us, all of us are created equal. that all of us deserve to be treated with dignity, justice, and fairness. that democracy must defend and be defined and be imposed, moved in every way possible. our rights, our freedoms, our dreams.but we know the idea of america—our institution, our people, our values that uphold it—are constantly being tested. ongoing debates about power and the exercise of power, about whether we lead by the example of our power or the power of our example, whether we show the courage to stand up to the abuse of power or we yield to it.after 50 years at the center of all of this, i know that believing in the idea of america means respecting the institutions that govern a free society: the presidency, the congress, the courts, a free and independent press. institutions that are rooted not to reflect the timeless words, but they echo the words of the declaration of independence: “we hold these truths to be self-evident.” rooted in the timeless words of the constitution, “we the people.”our system of separation of powers, checks and balances, it may not be perfect, but it’s maintained our democracy for nearly 250 years, longer than any other nation in history that’s ever tried such a bold experiment.in the past four years, our democracy has held strong. and every day, i’ve kept my commitment to be president for all americans through one of the toughest periods in our nation’s history.i’ve had a great partner in vice president kamala harris.it’s been the honor of my life to see the resilience of essential workers getting us through a once-in-a-century pandemic, the heroism of service members and first responders keeping us safe, the determination of advocates standing up for our rights and our freedoms.instead of losing their jobs to an economic crisis that we inherited, millions of americans now have the dignity of work; millions of entrepreneurs and companies creating new businesses and industries, hiring american workers, using american products.and together, we’ve launched a new era of american possibilities—one of the greatest modernizations of infrastructure in our entire history, from new roads, bridges, clean water, affordable high-speed internet for every american.we invented the semiconductor—smaller than the tip of my little finger. and now it’s bringing those chip factories and those jobs back to america where they belong, creating thousands of jobs.finally giving medicare the power to negotiate lower prescription drug prices for millions of seniors.and finally doing something to protect our children and our families by passing the most significant gun safety law in 30 years and bringing violent crime to a 50-year low.meeting our sacred obligation to over 1 million veterans so far who were exposed to toxic materials, and to their families—providing medical care and education benefits and more for their families.you know, it will take time to feel the full impact of all we’ve done together. but the seeds are planted, and they’ll grow and they’ll bloom for decades to come.at home, we’ve created nearly 17 million new jobs—more than any other single administration in a single term.more people have health care than ever before.and overseas, we’ve strengthened nato. ukraine is still free. and we’ve pulled ahead of our competition with china. and so much more.i’m so proud of how much we’ve accomplished together for the american people. and i wish the incoming administration success, because i want america to succeed.that’s why i’ve upheld my duty to ensure a peaceful and orderly transition of power to ensure we lead by the power of our example. i have no doubt that america is in a position to continue to succeed.that’s why, in my farewell address tonight, i want to warn the country of some things that give me great concern. and this is the dangerous concern and that’s the dangerous concentration of power in the hands of very few ultra-wealthy people, and the dangerous consequences if their abuse of power is left unchecked.today, an oligarchy is taking shape in america of extreme wealth, power, and influence that literally threatens our entire democracy, our basic rights and freedoms, and a fair shot for everyone to get ahead.we see the consequences all across america. and we’ve seen it before, more than a century ago. but the american people stood up to the robber barons back then and busted the trusts.they didn’t punish the wealthy. they just made the wealthy play by the rules everybody else had to. workers won rights to earn their fair share. you know, they were dealt into the deal, and it helped put us on the path to building the largest middle class and the most prosperous century any nation the world has ever seen, and we’ve got to do that again.in the last four years, that is exactly what we’ve done.people should be able to make as much as they can, but pplay by the same rules, pay their fair share in taxes.so much is at stake. right now, the existential threat of climate change has never been clearer. just look across the country, from california to north carolina.that’s why i signed the most significant climate and clean energy law ever, ever in the history of the world, and the rest of the world is trying to model it now. it’s working, creating jobs and industries of the future.you know, we’ve proven we don’t have to choose between protecting the environment and growing the economy. we’re doing both.but powerful forces want to wield their unchecked influence to eliminate the steps we’ve taken to tackle the climate crisis to serve their own interest for power and profit.we must not be bullied into sacrificing the future, the future of our children and our grandchildren. we must keep pushing forward and push faster. there is no time to waste.it’s also clear that american leadership in technology is unparalleled—an unparalleled source of innovation that can transform lives. we see the same dangers of the concentration of technology, power, and wealth.you know, his farewell address, president eisenhower spoke of the dangers of the military-industrial complex. he warned us then about, and i quote, “the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power,” end of quote.six decades later, i’m equally concerned about the potential rise of a tech-industrial complex that could pose real dangers for our country as well.americans are being buried under an avalanche of misinformation and disinformation enabling the abuse of power. the free press is crumbling. editors are disappearing. social media is giving up on fact-checking. the truth is smothered by lies told for power and for profit.we must hold the social platforms accountable to protect our children, our families, and our very democracy from the abuse of power.meanwhile, artificial intelligence is the most consequential technology of our time—perhaps of all time. nothing offers more profound possibilities and risks for our economy and our security, our society, our very...for humanity.artificial intelligence even has the potential to help us answer my call to end cancer as we know it. but unless safeguards are in place, ai could spawn new threats to our rights, our way of life, to our privacy, how we work, and how we protect our nation.we must make sure ai is safe and trustworthy and good for all humankind.in the age of ai, it’s more important than ever that the people must govern. and as the land of liberty, america—not china—must lead the world on the development of ai.you know, in the years ahead, it will help to be, it’s going to be up to the president, the presidency, the congress, the courts, the free press, and the american people to confront these powerful forces.we must reform the tax code—not by giving the biggest tax cuts to billionaires, but by making them begin to pay their fair share.we need to get dark money, that’s hidden funding behind too many campaigns’ contributions, we need to get it out of our politics.we need to enact an 18-year time limit, term limit, time and term, for the strongest ethics reforms for our supreme court.we need to ban members of congress from trading stock while they’re in the congress.we need to amend the constitution to make clear that no president—no president—is immune from crimes that he or she commits while in office. the president’s power is limit, it’s not absolute, and it shouldn’t be.and in a democracy, there’s another danger to the concentration of power and wealth. it erodes a sense of unity and common purpose. it causes distrust and division. participating in our democracy becomes exhausting and even disillusioning, and people don’t feel like they have a fair shot.but we have to stay engaged in the process. i know it’s frustrating.a fair shot is what makes america, america. everyone is entitled to a fair shot—not a guarantee, but just a fair shot, an even playing field—going as far as your hard work and talent can take you.we can never lose that essential truth—emain who we are.i’ve always believed and i’ve told other world leaders america can be defined by one word: possibilities.only in america do we believe anything possible, like a kid with a stutter from modest beginnings in scranton, pennsylvania, and claymont, delaware, sitting behind this desk in the oval office as president of the united states.that’s the magic of america. it’s all around us.upstairs in the residence of the white house, i’ve walked by a painting of the statue of liberty i don’t know how many times. in the painting, there are several workers climbing on the outstretched arm of the statue that holds the torch. it reminds me every day i pass it of the story and soul of our nation and the power of the american people.there’s a story of a veteran, a son of an immigrant, whose job it was to climb that torch and polish the amber panes so rays of light could reach out as far as possible. he was known as the “keeper of the flame.”he once said of the statue of liberty, quote, “speaks a silent universal language, one of hope, that anyone who seeks and speaks freedom can understand.”yes, we sway back and forth to withstand the fury of the storm, to stand the test of time—a constant struggle, constant struggle—a short distance between peril and possibility.but what i believe is the america of our dreams is always closer than we think. and it’s up to us to make our dreams come true.let me close by stating my gratitude to so many people. to the members of my administration, as well as public service and first responders across the country and around the world, thank you for stepping up to serve.to our service members and your families, it’s been the highest honor of my life to lead you as commander in chief.and, of course, to kamala and her incredible partner, a historic vice president. she and doug have become like family. and to me, family is everything.my deepest appreciation to our amazing first lady, who is with me in the oval today, for our entire family. you are the love of my life and lifes of my love.and my eternal thanks to you, the american people. after 50 years of public service, i give you my word, i still believe in the idea for which this nation stands, a nation where the strengths of our institutions and the character of our people matter and must endure.now it’s your turn to stand guard. may you all be the keeper of the flame. may you keep the faith.i love america. you love it too.god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you for this great honor. good evening, my fellow americans. i want to talk to you about where we are in the battle against covid-19, the progress we’ve made, and the work we have left to do. and it starts with understanding this: even as the delta variant 19 [sic] has—covid-19—has been hitting this country hard, we have the tools to combat the virus, if we can come together as a country and use those tools. if we raise our vaccination rate, protect ourselves and others with masking and expanded testing, and identify people who are infected, we can and we will turn the tide on covid-19. it will take a lot of hard work, and it’s going to take some time. many of us are frustrated with the nearly 80 million americans who are still not vaccinated, even though the vaccine is safe, effective, and free. you might be confused about what is true and what is false about covid-19. so before i outline the new steps to fight covid-19 that i’m going to be announcing tonight, let me give you some clear information about where we stand. first, we have cons—we have made considerable progress in battling covid-19. when i became president, about 2 million americans were fully vaccinated. today, over 175 million americans have that protection. before i took office, we hadn’t ordered enough vaccine for every american. just weeks in office, we did. the week before i took office, on january 20th of this year, over 25,000 americans died that week from covid-19. last week, that grim weekly toll was down 70 percent. and in the three months before i took office, our economy was faltering, creating just 50,000 jobs a month. we’re now averaging 700,000 new jobs a month in the past three months. this progress is real. but while america is in much better shape than it was seven months ago when i took office, i need to tell you a second fact. we’re in a tough stretch, and it could last for a while. the highly contagious delta variant that i began to warn america about back in july spread in late summer like it did in other countries before us. while the vaccines provide strong protections for the vaccinated, we read about, we hear about, and we see the stories of hospitalized people, people on their death beds, among the unvaccinated over these past few weeks. this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated. and it’s caused by the fact that despite america having an unprecedented and successful vaccination program, despite the fact that for almost five months free vaccines have been available in 80,000 different locations, we still have nearly 80 million americans who have failed to get the shot. and to make matters worse, there are elected officials actively working to undermine the fight against covid-19. instead of encouraging people to get vaccinated and mask up, they’re ordering mobile morgues for the unvaccinated dying from covid in their communities. this is totally unacceptable. third, if you wonder how all this adds up, here’s the math: the vast majority of americans are doing the right thing. nearly three quarters of the eligible have gotten at least one shot, but one quarter has not gotten any. that’s nearly 80 million americans not vaccinated. and in a country as large as ours, that’s 25 percent minority. that 25 percent can cause a lot of damage—and they are. the unvaccinated overcrowd our hospitals, are overrunning the emergency rooms and intensive care units, leaving no room for someone with a heart attack, or pancreitis [pancreatitis], or cancer. and fourth, i want to emphasize that the vaccines provide very strong protection from severe illness from covid-19. i know there’s a lot of confusion and misinformation. but the world’s leading scientists confirm that if you are fully vaccinated, your risk of severe illness from covid-19 is very low. in fact, based on available data from the summer, only one of out of every 160,000 fully vaccinated americans was hospitalized for covid per day. these are the facts. so here’s where we stand: the path ahead, even with the delta variant, is not nearly as bad as last winter. but what makes it incredibly more frustrating is that we have the tools to combat covid-19, and a distinct minority of americans –supported by a distinct minority of elected officials—are keeping us from turning the corner. these pandemic politics, as i refer to, are making people sick, causing unvaccinated people to die. we cannot allow these actions to stand in the way of protecting the large majority of americans who have done their part and want to get back to life as normal. as your president, i’m announcing tonight a new plan to require more americans to be vaccinated, to combat those blocking public health. my plan also increases testing, protects our economy, and will make our kids safer in schools. it consists of six broad areas of action and many specific measures in each that—and each of those actions that you can read more about at whitehouse.gov. whitehouse.gov. the measures—these are going to take time to have full impact. but if we implement them, i believe and the scientists indicate, that in the months ahead we can reduce the number of unvaccinated americans, decrease hospitalizations and deaths, and allow our children to go to school safely and keep our economy strong by keeping businesses open. first, we must increase vaccinations among the unvaccinated with new vaccination requirements. of the nearly 80 million eligible americans who have not gotten vaccinated, many said they were waiting for approval from the food and drug administration—the fda. well, last month, the fda granted that approval. so, the time for waiting is over. this summer, we made progress through the combination of vaccine requirements and incentives, as well as the fda approval. four million more people got their first shot in august than they did in july. but we need to do more. this is not about freedom or personal choice. it’s about protecting yourself and those around you—the people you work with, the people you care about, the people you love. my job as president is to protect all americans. so, tonight, i’m announcing that the department of labor is developing an emergency rule to require all employers with 100 or more employees, that together employ over 80 million workers, to ensure their workforces are fully vaccinated or show a negative test at least once a week. some of the biggest companies are already requiring this: united airlines, disney, tysons food, and even fox news. the bottom line: we’re going to protect vaccinated workers from unvaccinated co-workers. we’re going to reduce the spread of covid-19 by increasing the share of the workforce that is vaccinated in businesses all across america. my plan will extend the vaccination requirements that i previously issued in the healthcare field. already, i’ve announced, we’ll be requiring vaccinations that all nursing home workers who treat patients on medicare and medicaid, because i have that federal authority. tonight, i’m using that same authority to expand that to cover those who work in hospitals, home healthcare facilities, or other medical facilities–a total of 17 million healthcare workers. if you’re seeking care at a health facility, you should be able to know that the people treating you are vaccinated. simple. straightforward. period. next, i will sign an executive order that will now require all executive branch federal employees to be vaccinated—all. and i’ve signed another executive order that will require federal contractors to do the same. if you want to work with the federal government and do business with us, get vaccinated. if you want to do business with the federal government, vaccinate your workforce. and tonight, i’m removing one of the last remaining obstacles that make it difficult for you to get vaccinated. the department of labor will require employers with 100 or more workers to give those workers paid time off to get vaccinated. no one should lose pay in order to get vaccinated or take a loved one to get vaccinated. today, in total, the vaccine requirements in my plan will affect about 100 million americans—two thirds of all workers. and for other sectors, i issue this appeal: to those of you running large entertainment venues—from sports arenas to concert venues to movie theaters—please require folks to get vaccinated or show a negative test as a condition of entry. and to the nation’s family physicians, pediatricians, gps—general practitioners—you’re the most trusted medical voice to your patients. you may be the one person who can get someone to change their mind about being vaccinated. tonight, i’m asking each of you to reach out to your unvaccinated patients over the next two weeks and make a personal appeal to them to get the shot. america needs your personal involvement in this critical effort. and my message to unvaccinated americans is this: what more is there to wait for? what more do you need to see? we’ve made vaccinations free, safe, and convenient. the vaccine has fda approval. over 200 million americans have gotten at least one shot. we’ve been patient, but our patience is wearing thin. and your refusal has cost all of us. so, please, do the right thing. but just don’t take it from me; listen to the voices of unvaccinated americans who are lying in hospital beds, taking their final breaths, saying, “if only i had gotten vaccinated.” “if only.” it’s a tragedy. please don’t let it become yours. the second piece of my plan is continuing to protect the vaccinated. for the vast majority of you who have gotten vaccinated, i understand your anger at those who haven’t gotten vaccinated. i understand the anxiety about getting a “breakthrough” case. but as the science makes clear, if you’re fully vaccinated, you’re highly protected from severe illness, even if you get covid-19. in fact, recent data indicates there is only one confirmed positive case per 5,000 fully vaccinated americans per day. you’re as safe as possible, and we’re doing everything we can to keep it that way—keep it that way, keep you safe. that’s where boosters come in—the shots that give you even more protection than after your second shot. now, i know there’s been some confusion about boosters. so, let me be clear: last month, our top government doctors announced an initial plan for booster shots for vaccinated americans. they believe that a booster is likely to provide the highest level of protection yet. of course, the decision of which booster shots to give, when to start them, and who will give them, will be left completely to the scientists at the fda and the centers for disease control. but while we wait, we’ve done our part. we’ve bought enough boosters—enough booster shots—and the distribution system is ready to administer them. as soon as they are authorized, those eligible will be able to get a booster right away in tens of thousands of site across the—sites across the country for most americans, at your nearby drug store, and for free. the third piece of my plan is keeping—and maybe the most important—is keeping our children safe and our schools open. for any parent, it doesn’t matter how low the risk of any illness or accident is when it comes to your child or grandchild. trust me, i know. so, let me speak to you directly. let me speak to you directly to help ease some of your worries. it comes down to two separate categories: children ages 12 and older who are eligible for a vaccine now, and children ages 11 and under who are not are yet eligible. the safest thing for your child 12 and older is to get them vaccinated. they get vaccinated for a lot of things. that’s it. get them vaccinated. as with adults, almost all the serious covid-19 cases we’re seeing among adolescents are in unvaccinated 12- to 17-year-olds—an age group that lags behind in vaccination rates. so, parents, please get your teenager vaccinated. what about children under the age of 12 who can’t get vaccinated yet? well, the best way for a parent to protect their child under the age of 12 starts at home. every parent, every teen sibling, every caregiver around them should be vaccinated. children have four times higher chance of getting hospitalized if they live in a state with low vaccination rates rather than the states with high vaccination rates. now, if you’re a parent of a young child, you’re wondering when will it be—when will it be—the vaccine available for them. i strongly support an independent scientific review for vaccine uses for children under 12. we can’t take shortcuts with that scientific work. but i’ve made it clear i will do everything within my power to support the fda with any resource it needs to continue to do this as safely and as quickly as possible, and our nation’s top doctors are committed to keeping the public at large updated on the process so parents can plan. now to the schools. we know that if schools follow the science and implement the safety measures—like testing, masking, adequate ventilation systems that we provided the money for, social distancing, and vaccinations—then children can be safe from covid-19 in schools. today, about 90 percent of school staff and teachers are vaccinated. we should get that to 100 percent. my administration has already acquired teachers at the schools run by the defense department—because i have the authority as president in the federal system—the defense department and the interior department—to get vaccinated. that’s authority i possess. tonight, i’m announcing that we’ll require all of nearly 300,000 educators in the federal paid program, head start program, must be vaccinated as well to protect your youngest—our youngest—most precious americans and give parents the comfort. and tonight, i’m calling on all governors to require vaccination for all teachers and staff. some already have done so, but we need more to step up. vaccination requirements in schools are nothing new. they work. they’re overwhelmingly supported by educators and their unions. and to all school officials trying to do the right thing by our children: i’ll always be on your side. let me be blunt. my plan also takes on elected officials and states that are undermining you and these lifesaving actions. right now, local school officials are trying to keep children safe in a pandemic while their governor picks a fight with them and even threatens their salaries or their jobs. talk about bullying in schools. if they’ll not help—if these governors won’t help us beat the pandemic, i’ll use my power as president to get them out of the way. the department of education has already begun to take legal action against states undermining protection that local school officials have ordered. any teacher or school official whose pay is withheld for doing the right thing, we will have that pay restored by the federal government 100 percent. i promise you i will have your back. the fourth piece of my plan is increasing testing and masking. from the start, america has failed to do enough covid-19 testing. in order to better detect and control the delta variant, i’m taking steps tonight to make testing more available, more affordable, and more convenient. i’ll use the defense production act to increase production of rapid tests, including those that you can use at home. while that production is ramping up, my administration has worked with top retailers, like walmart, amazon, and kroger’s, and tonight we’re announcing that, no later than next week, each of these outlets will start to sell at-home rapid test kits at cost for the next three months. this is an immediate price reduction for at-home test kits for up to 35 percent reduction. we’ll also expand—expand free testing at 10,000 pharmacies around the country. and we’ll commit—we’re committing $2 billion to purchase nearly 300 million rapid tests for distribution to community health centers, food banks, schools, so that every american, no matter their income, can access free and convenient tests. this is important to everyone, particularly for a parent or a child—with a child not old enough to be vaccinated. you’ll be able to test them at home and test those around them. in addition to testing, we know masking helps stop the spread of covid-19. that’s why when i came into office, i required masks for all federal buildings and on federal lands, on airlines, and other modes of transportation. today—tonight, i’m announcing that the transportation safety administration—the tsa—will double the fines on travelers that refuse to mask. if you break the rules, be prepared to pay. and, by the way, show some respect. the anger you see on television toward flight attendants and others doing their job is wrong; it’s ugly. the fifth piece of my plan is protecting our economic recovery. because of our vaccination program and the american rescue plan, which we passed early in my administration, we’ve had record job creation for a new administration, economic growth unmatched in 40 years. we cannot let unvaccinated do this progress—undo it, turn it back. so tonight, i’m announcing additional steps to strengthen our economic recovery. we’ll be expanding covid-19 economic injury disaster loan programs. that’s a program that’s going to allow small businesses to borrow up to $2 million from the current $500,000 to keep going if covid-19 impacts on their sales. these low-interest, long-term loans require no repayment for two years and be can used to hire and retain workers, purchase inventory, or even pay down higher cost debt racked up since the pandemic began. i’ll also be taking additional steps to help small businesses stay afloat during the pandemic. sixth, we’re going to continue to improve the care of those who do get covid-19. in early july, i announced the deployment of surge response teams. these are teams comprised of experts from the department of health and human services, the cdc, the defense department, and the federal emergency management agency—fema—to areas in the country that need help to stem the spread of covid-19. since then, the federal government has deployed nearly 1,000 staff, including doctors, nurses, paramedics, into 18 states. today, i’m announcing that the defense department will double the number of military health teams that they’ll deploy to help their fellow americans in hospitals around the country. additionally, we’re increasing the availability of new medicines recommended by real doctors, not conspir-—conspiracy theorists. the monoclonal antibody treatments have been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization by up to 70 percent for unvaccinated people at risk of developing sefe-—severe disease. we’ve already distributed 1.4 million courses of these treatments to save lives and reduce the strain on hospitals. tonight, i’m announcing we will increase the average pace of shipment across the country of free monoclonal antibody treatments by another 50 percent. before i close, let me say this: communities of color are disproportionately impacted by this virus. and as we continue to battle covid-19, we will ensure that equity continues to be at the center of our response. we’ll ensure that everyone is reached. my first responsibility as president is to protect the american people and make sure we have enough vaccine for every american, including enough boosters for every american who’s approved to get one. we also know this virus transcends borders. that’s why, even as we execute this plan at home, we need to continue fighting the virus overseas, continue to be the arsenal of vaccines. we’re proud to have donated nearly 140 million vaccines over 90 countries, more than all other countries combined, including europe, china, and russia combined. that’s american leadership on a global stage, and that’s just the beginning. we’ve also now started to ship another 500 million covid vaccines—pfizer vaccines—purchased to donate to 100 lower-income countries in need of vaccines. and i’ll be announcing additional steps to help the rest of the world later this month. as i recently released the key parts of my pandemic preparedness plan so that america isn’t caught flat-footed when a new pandemic comes again—as it will—next month, i’m also going to release the plan in greater detail. so let me close with this: we have so-—we’ve made so much progress during the past seven months of this pandemic. the recent increases in vaccinations in august already are having an impact in some states where case counts are dropping in recent days. even so, we remain at a critical moment, a critical time. we have the tools. now we just have to finish the job with truth, with science, with confidence, and together as one nation. look, we’re the united states of america. there’s nothing—not a single thing—we’re unable to do if we do it together. so let’s stay together. god bless you all and all those who continue to serve on the frontlines of this pandemic. and may god protect our troops. get vaccinated. my fellow americans, i’m speaking to you tonight from behind the resolute desk in the oval office. in this sacred space, i’m surrounded by portraits of extraordinary american presidents. thomas jefferson, who wrote the immortal words that guide this nation. george washington, who showed us presidents are not kings. abraham lincoln, who implored us to reject malice. franklin roosevelt, who inspired us to reject fear. i revere this office, but i love my country more. it’s been the honor of my life to serve as your president. but in the defense of democracy, which is at stake, i think it’s more important than any title. i draw strength and i find joy in working for the american people. but this sacred task of perfecting our union — it’s not about me. it’s about you, your families, your futures. it’s about “we the people.” we can never forget that, and i never have. i’ve made it clear that i believe america is at an inflection point, one of those rare moments in history when the decisions we make now will determine our fate of our nation and the world for decades to come. america is going to have to choose between moving forward or backward, between hope and hate, between unity and division. we have to decide: do we still believe in honesty, decency, and respect; freedom, justice, and democracy? in this moment, we can see those we disagree with not as enemies but as fellow americans. can we do that? does character in public life still matter? i believe i know the answer to these questions, because i know you, the american people. and i know this: we are a great nation because we are a good people. when you elected me to this office, i promised to always level with you, to tell you the truth. and the truth, the sacred cause of this country is larger than any one of us. and those of us who cherish that cause — cherish it so much — the cause of american democracy itself — must unite to protect it. you know, in recent weeks, it’s become clear to me that i needed to unite my party in this critical endeavor. i believe my record as president, my leadership in the world, my vision for america’s future all merited a second term, but nothing — nothing — can come in the way of saving our democracy. that includes personal ambition. so, i’ve decided the best way forward is to pass the torch to a new generation. that’s the best way to unite our nation. i know there is a time and a place for long years of experience in public life. but there is also a time and place for new voices, fresh voices — yes, younger voices. and that time and place is now. over the next six months, i’ll be focused on doing my job as president. that means i will continue to lower costs for hardworking families, grow our economy. i’ll keep defending our personal freedoms and our civil rights, from the right to vote to the right to choose. and i’ll keep calling out hate and extremism and make it clear there is no place — no place in america for political violence or any violence ever, period. i’m going to keep speaking out to protect our kids from gun violence, our planet from the climate crisis. it is the existential threat. and i will keep fighting for my cancer moonshot so we can end cancer as we know it, because we can do it. and i’m going to call for supreme court reform because this is critical to our democracy — supreme court reform. you know, i will keep working to ensure america remains strong and secure and the leader of the free world. i’m the first president in this century to report to the american people that the united states is not at war anywhere in the world. i will keep rallying a coalition of proud nations to stop putin from taking over ukraine and doing more damage. i will keep nato stronger, and i’ll make it more powerful and more united than any time in all of our history. and i’ll keep doing the same for our allies in the pacific. you know, when i came to office, the conventional wisdom was that china would inevitably surpass the united states. that’s not the case anymore. and i’m going to keep working to end the war in gaza, bring home all the hostages, and bring peace and security to the middle east and end this war. we’re also working around the clock to bring home americans being unjustly detained all around the world. you know, we have come so far since my inauguration. on that day, i told you as i stood in that winter — we stood in a winter of peril and a winter of possibilities — peril and possibilities. we’re in the grip of the worst pandemic in a century, the worst economic crisis since the great depression, the worst attack on our democracy since the civil war. but we came together as americans and we got through it. we emerged stronger, more prosperous, and more secure. and today, we have the strongest economy in the world, creating nearly 16 million new jobs — a record. wages are up. inflation continues to come down. the racial wealth gap is the lowest it’s been in 20 years. we’re literally rebuilding our entire nation — urban, suburban, rural, and tribal communities. manufacturing has come back to america. we’re leading the world again in chips and science and innovation. and we finally beat big pharma after all these years to lower the cost of prescription drugs for seniors. and i’m going to keep fighting to make sure we lower the costs for everyone, not just seniors. more people have health care today in america than ever before. and i signed one of the most significant laws helping millions of veterans and their families who were exposed to toxic materials. you know, the most significant climate law ever in the history of the world. the first major gun safety law in 30 years. and today, the violent crime rate is at a 50-year low. we’re also securing our border. border crossings are lower today than when the previous administration left office. and i kept my commitment to appoint the first black woman to the supreme court of the united states of america. i also kept my commitment to have an administration that looks like america and to be a president for all americans. that’s what i’ve done. i ran for president four years ago because i believed and still do that the soul of america was at stake. the very nature of who we are was at stake. and that’s still the case. america is an idea — an idea stronger than any army, bigger than any ocean, more powerful than any dictator or tyrant. it’s the most powerful idea in the history of the world. that idea is that we hold these truths to be self-evident. we’re all created equal, endowed by our creator with certain unalienable rights: life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness. we’ve never fully lived up to it — to this sacred idea, but we’ve never walked away from it either. and i do not believe the american people will walk away from it now. in just a few months, the american people will choose the course of america’s future. i made my choice. i have made my views known. i would like to thank our great vice president, kamala harris. she’s experienced. she’s tough. she’s capable. she has been an incredible partner to me and a leader for our country. now the choice is up to you, the american people. when you make that choice, remember the words of benjamin franklin, who’s hanging on my wall here in the oval office alongside the busts of dr. king and rosa parks and cesar chavez. when ben franklin was asked as he emerged from the convention going on whether the founders had given america a monarchy or a republic, franklin’s response was, “a republic, if you can keep it.” “a republic, if you can keep it.” whether we keep our republic is now in your hands. my fellow americans, it’s been the privilege of my life to serve this nation for over 50 years. nowhere else on earth could a kid with a stutter from modest beginnings in scranton, pennsylvania, and claymont, delaware, one day sit behind the resolute desk in the oval office as president of the united states. but here i am. that’s what’s so special about america. we are a nation of promise and possibilities, of dreamers and doers, of ordinary americans doing extraordinary things. i have given my heart and my soul to our nation, like so many others. and i have been blessed a million times in return with the love and support of the american people. i hope you have some idea how grateful i am to all of you. the great thing about america is here kings and dictators do not rule. the people do. history is in your hands. the power is in your hands. the idea of america lies in your hands. we just have to keep the faith and remember who we are. we are the united states of america, and there is simply nothing — nothing beyond our capacity when we do it together. so, let’s act together, preserve our democracy. god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. thank you. my fellow americans, i want to speak to you tonight about the need for us to lower the temperature in our politics and to remember, while we may disagree, we are not enemies. we’re neighbors. we’re friends, coworkers, citizens. and, most importantly, we are fellow americans. and we must stand together. yesterday’s shooting at donald trump’s rally in pennsylvania calls on all of us to take a step back, take stock of where we are, how we go forward from here. thankfully, former [president] trump is not seriously injured. i spoke with him last night. i’m grateful he’s doing well. and jill and i keep him and his family in our prayers. we also extend our deepest condolences to the family of the victim who was killed. corey was a husband, a father, a volunteer firefighter, a hero, sheltering his family from those bullets. we should all hold his family and all those injured in our prayers.earlier today, i spoke about an ongoing investigation. we do not know the motive of the shooter yet. we don’t know his opinions or affiliations. we don’t know whether he had help or support or if he communicated with anyone else. law enforcement professionals, as i speak, are investigating those questions. tonight, i want to speak to what we do know: a former president was shot. an american citizen killed while simply exercising his freedom to support the candidate of his choosing. we cannot — we must not go down this road in america. we’ve traveled it before throughout our history. violence has never been the answer, whether it’s with members of congress in both parties being targeted in the shot, or a violent mob attacking the capitol on january 6th, or a brutal attack on the spouse of former speaker of the house nancy pelosi, or information and intimidation on election officials, or the kidnapping plot against a sitting governor, or an attempted assassination on donald trump.there is no place in america for this kind of violence or for any violence ever. period. no exceptions. we can’t allow this violence to be normalized. you know, the political rhetoric in this country has gotten very heated. it’s time to cool it down. and we all have a responsibility to do that. yes, we have deeply felt, strong disagreements. the stakes in this election are enormously high. i’ve said it many times that the choice in this elect— that we make in this election is going to shape the future of america and the world for decades to come. i believe that with all my soul. i know that millions of my fellow americans believe it as well.and some have a different view as to the direction our country should take. disagreement is inevitable in american democracy. it’s part of human nature. but politics must never be a literal battlefield and, god forbid, a killing field.i believe politics ought to be an arena for peaceful debate, to pursue justice, to make decisions guided by the declaration of independence and our constitution. we stand for an america not of extremism and fury but of decency and grace. all of us now face a time of testing as the election approaches. and the higher the stakes, the more fervent the passions become. this places an added burden on each of us to ensure that no matter how strong our convictions, we must never descend into violence. the republican convention will start tomorrow. i have no doubt they’ll criticize my record and offer their own vision for this country. i’ll be traveling this week, making the case for our record and the vision — my vision of the country — our vision. i’ll continue to speak out strongly for our democracy, stand up for our constitution and the rule of law, to call for action at the ballot box, no violence on our streets. that’s how democracy should work. we debate and disagree. we compare and contrast the character of the candidates, the records, the issues, the agenda, the vision for america. but in america, we resolve our differences at the battol [ballot] box. you know, that’s how we do it, at the battol [ballot] box, not with bullets. the power to change america should always rest in the hands of the people, not in the hands of a would-be assassin.you know, the path forward through competing visions of the campaign should always be resolved peacefully, not through acts of violence.you know, we’re blessed to live in the greatest country on earth. and i believe that with every soul — every power of my being. so, tonight, i’m asking every american to recommit to make america so — make america what it — think about it. what’s made america so special? here in america, everyone wants to be treated with dignity and respect, and hate must have no safe harbor. here in america, we need to get out of our silos, where we only listen to those with whom we agree, where misinformation is rampant, where foreign actors fan the flames of our division to shape the outcomes consistent with their interests, not ours.let’s remember, here in america, while unity is the most elusive of goals right now, nothing is more — more important for us now than standing together. we can do this. you know, from the beginning, our founders understood the power of passion, and so they created a democracy that gave reason and balance a chance to prevail over brute force. that’s the america we must be, an american democracy where arguments are made in good faith, an american democracy where the rule of law is respected, an american democracy where decency, dignity, fair play aren’t just quaint notions, but living, breathing realities.we owe that to those who come before us, to those who gave their lives for this country. we that — we owe that to ourselves. we owe it to our children and our grandchildren. look, let’s never lose sight of who we are. let’s remember we are the united states of america. there is nothing, nothing, nothing beyond our capacity when we do it together.so, god bless you all. and may god protect our troops. sorry to keep you waiting. good afternoon. the russian military has begun a brutal assault on the people of ukraine without provocation, without justification, without necessity. this is a premeditated attack. vladimir putin has been planning this for months, as i’ve been—as we’ve been saying all along. he moved more than 175,000 troops, military equipment into positions along the ukrainian border. he moved blood supplies into position and built a field hospital, which tells you all you need to know about his intentions all along. he rejected every good-faith effort the united states and our allies and partners made to address our mutual security concerns through dialogue to avoid needless conflict and avert human suffering. for weeks—for weeks, we have been warning that this would happen. and now it’s unfolding largely as we predicted. in the past week, we’ve seen shelling increase in the donbas, the region in eastern ukraine controlled by russian-backed separatists. rus-—the russian government has perpetrated cyberattacks against ukraine. we saw a staged political theater in moscow—outlandish and baseless claims that ukraine was—ukraine was about to invade and launch a war against russia, that ukraine was prepared to use chemical weapons, that ukraine committed a genocide—without any evidence. we saw a flagrant violation of international law in attempting to unilaterally create two new so-called republics on sovereign ukrainian territory. and at the very moment that the united nations security council was meeting to stand up for ukraine’s sovereignty to stave off invasion, putin declared his war. within moments—moments, missile strikes began to fall on historic cities across ukraine. then came in the air raids, followed by tanks and troops rolling in. we’ve been transparent with the world. we’ve shared declassified evidence about russia’s plans and cyberattacks and false pretexts so that there can be no confusion or cover-up about what putin was doing. putin is the aggressor. putin chose this war. and now he and his country will bear the consequences. today, i’m authorizing additional strong sanctions and new limitations on what can be exported to russia. this is going to impose severe costs on the russian economy, both immediately and over time. we have purposefully designed these sanctions to maximize the long-term impact on russia and to minimize the impact on the united states and our allies. and i want to be clear: the united states is not doing this alone. for months, we’ve been building a coalition of partners representing well more than half of the global economy. twenty-seven members of the european union, including france, germany, italy—as well as the united kingdom, canada, japan, australia, new zealand, and many others—to amplify the joint impact of our response. i just spoke with the g7 leaders this morning, and we are in full and total agreement. we will limit russia’s ability to do business in dollars, euros, pounds, and yen to be part of the global economy. we will limit their ability to do that. we are going to stunt the ability to finance and grow rus-—the russian military. we’re going to impose major—and we’re going to impair their ability to compete in a high-tech 21st century economy. we’ve already seen the impact of our actions on russia’s currency, the ruble, which early today hit its weakest level ever—ever in history. and the russian stock market plunged today. the russian government’s borrowing rate spiked by over 15 percent. in today’s actions, we have now sanctioned russian banks that together hold around $1 trillion in assets. we’ve cut off russia’s largest bank—a bank that holds more than one third of russia’s banking assets by itself—cut it off from the us financial system. and today, we’re also blocking four more major banks. that means every asset they have in america will be frozen. this includes v.t.b., the second-largest bank in russia, which has $250 billion in assets. as promised, we’re also adding names to the list of russian elites and their family members that are sanctioning—that we’re sanctioning as well. as i said on tuesday, these are people who personally gain from the kremlin’s policies and they should share in the pain. we will keep up this drumbeat of those designations against corrupt billionaires in the days ahead. on tuesday, we stopped the russian government from raising money from us or european investors. now, we’re going to apply the same restrictions to russia’s largest state-owned enterprises—companies with assets that exceed $1.4 trillion. some of the most powerful impacts of our actions will come over time as we squeeze russia’s access to finance and technology for strategic sectors of its economy and degrade its industrial capacity for years to come. between our actions and those of our allies and partners, we estimate that we’ll cut off more than half of russia’s high-tech imports. it will strike a blow to their ability to continue to modernize their military. it’ll degrade their aerospace industry, including their space program. it will hurt their ability to build ships, reducing their ability to compete economically. and it will be a major hit to putin’s long-term strategic ambitions. and we’re preparing to do more. in addition to the economic penalties we’re imposing, we’re also taking steps to defend our nato allies, particularly in the east. tomorrow, nato will convene a summit—we’ll be there—to bring together the leaders of 30 allied nations and close partners to affirm our solidarity and to map out the next steps we will take to further strengthen all aspects of our nato alliance. although we provided over $650 million in defensive assistance to ukraine just this year—this last year, let me say it again: our forces are not and will not be engaged in the conflict with russia in ukraine. our forces are not going to europe to fight in ukraine but to defend our nato allies and reassure those allies in the east. as i made crystal clear, the united states will defend every inch of nato territory with the full force of american power. and the good news is: nato is more united and more determined than ever. there is no doubt—no doubt that the united states and every nato ally will meet our article 5 commitments, which says that an attack on one is an attack on all. over the past few weeks, i ordered thousands of additional forces to germany and poland as part of our commitment to nato. on tuesday, in response to russia’s aggressive action, including its troop presence in belarus and the black sea, i’ve authorized the deployment of ground and air forces already stationed in europe to nato’s eastern flank allies: estonia, latvia, lithuania, poland, and romania. our allies have also been stepping up, adding—the other allies, the rest of nato—adding their own forces and capabilities to ensure our collective defense. and today, within hours of russia’s unleashing its assault, nato came together and authorized and activated—an activation of response plans. this will enable nato’s high-readiness forces to deploy and—when and where they’re needed to protect our nato allies on the eastern boundaries of europe. and now i’m authorizing additional us forces and capabilities to deploy to germany as part of nato’s response, including some of us-based forces that the department of defense placed on standby weeks ago. i’ve also spoken with defense secretary austin and chairman of the joint chiefs, general milley, about preparations for additional moves should they become necessary to protect our nato allies and support the greatest military alliance in the history of the world—nato. as we respond, my administration is using the tools—every tool at our disposal to protect american families and businesses from rising prices at the gas pump. you know, we’re taking active steps to bring down the costs. and american oil and gas companies should not—should not exploit this moment to hike their prices to raise profits. you know, in our sanctions package, we specifically designed to allow energy payments to continue. we are closely monitoring energy supplies for any disruption. we have been coordinating with major oil producing and consuming countries toward our common interest to secure global energy supplies. we are actively working with countries around the world to elevate [evaluate] a collective release from the strategic petroleum reserves of major energy-consuming countries. and the united states will release additional barrels of oil as conditions warrant. i know this is hard and that americans are already hurting. i will do everything in my power to limit the pain the american people are feeling at the gas pump. this is critical to me. but this aggression cannot go unanswered. if it did, the consequences for america would be much worse. america stands up to bullies. we stand up for freedom. this is who we are. let me also repeat the warning i made last week: if russia pursues cyberattacks against our companies, our critical infrastructure, we are prepared to respond. for months, we have been working closely with our private—with the private sector to harden their cyber defenses, sharpen our ability to respond to russian cyberattacks as well. i spoke late last night to president zelenskyy of ukraine and i assured him that the united states, together with our allies and partners in europe, will support the ukrainian people as they defend their country. we’ll provide humanitarian relief to ease their suffering. and in the early days of this conflict, russian propaganda outlets will keep trying to hide the truth and claim success for its military operation against a made-up threat. but history has shown time and again how swift gains in territory eventually give way to grinding occupations, acts of mass civil—mass civil disobedience, and strategic dead-ends. the next few weeks and months will be hard on the people of ukraine. putin has unleashed a great pain on them. but the ukrainian people have known 30 years of independence, and they have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backwards. this is a dangerous moment for all of europe, for the freedom around the world. putin has a—has committed an assault on the very principles that uphold global peace. but now the entire world sees clearly what putin and his kremlin—and his kremlin allies are really all about. this was never about genuine security concerns on their part. it was always about naked aggression, about putin’s desire for empire by any means necessary—by bullying russia’s neighbors through coercion and corruption, by changing borders by force, and, ultimately, by choosing a war without a cause. putin’s actions betray his sinister vision for the future of our world—one where nations take what they want by force. but it is a vision that the united states and freedom-loving nations everywhere will oppose with every tool of our considerable power. the united states and our allies and partners will emerge from this stronger, more united, more determined, and more purposeful. and putin’s aggression against ukraine will end up costing russia dearly—economically and strategically. we will make sure of that. putin will be a pariah on the international stage. any nation that countenances russia’s naked aggression against ukraine will be stained by association. when the history of this era is written, putin’s choice to make a totally unjustifiable war on ukraine will have left russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger. liberty, democracy, human dignity—these are the forces far more powerful than fear and oppression. they cannot be extinguished by tyrants like putin and his armies. they cannot be erased by people—from people’s hearts and hopes by any amount of violence and intimidation. they endure. and in the contest between democracy and autocracy, between sovereignty and subjugation, make no mistake: freedom will prevail. god bless the people of a free and democratic ukraine. and may god protect our troops. associated press, zeke. i heard the first part: do i have any plans to speak with putin at this point. and what? well, it’s a large conflict already. the way we’re going to assure it’s not going to spiral to a larger conflict is by providing all the forces needed in the eastern european nations that are members of nato. nato is more united than it’s ever been. and i have no plans to talk with putin. wall street journal, tarina [tarini]. the sanctions that we have proposed on all their banks is of equal consequence—maybe more consequence than swift—number one. number two, it is always an option. but right now, that’s not the position that the rest of europe wishes to take. cecilia ve-—vega, abc. i have no idea what he’s threatening. i know what he has done, number one. and number two, no one expected the sanctions to prevent anything from happening. that has to sh-—this is going to take time. and we have to show resolve so he knows what’s coming and so the people of russia know what he’s brought on them. that’s what this is all about. this is going to take time. it’s not going to occur—he’s going to say, “oh my god, these sanctions are coming. i’m going to stand down.” he’s going to test the resolve of the west to see if we stay together. and we will. we will and it will impose significant costs on him. (points to reporter.) yes. first of all, there’s no doubt that when a major nuclear power attacks and invades another country that the world is going to respond and markets are going to respond all over the world. so, there’s no doubt about that, number one. number two, the notion that this is going to last for a long time is highly unlikely, as long as we continue to stay resolved in imposing the sanctions we’re going to impose on russia, period. what’s your next question? i’m sorry. at the time, he was—i made it clear he was an adversary, and i said he was “worthy.” i didn’t underestimate him. and i’ve read most of everything he’s written. did you read the—i shouldn’t sa-—i’m not being a wise guy. the—you heard the speech he made—almost an hour’s worth of speeches—why he was going into ukraine. he has much larger ambitions in ukraine. he wants to, in fact, reestablish the former soviet union. that’s what this is about. and i think that his—his ambitions are—are completely contrary to the place where the rest of the world has arrived. yes. russian bullets, missiles, and tanks in ukraine. yes, i am. i didn’t say sanctions couldn’t stop him. yes, but the threat of the sanctions and imposing the sanctions and seeing the effect of the sanctions are two different things. they’re two different things. and we’re now going to—he’s going to begin to see the effect of the sanctions. because it will so weaken his country that he’ll have to make a very, very difficult choices of whether to continue to move toward being a second-rate power or, in fact, respond. it’s not a bluff; it’s on the table. yes. specifically, the sanctions we’ve imposed exceed swift. the sanctions we imposed exceed anything that’s ever been done. the sanctions we imposed have generated two thirds of the world joining us. they are profound sanctions. let’s have a conversation in another month or so to see if they’re working. yes. there is a complete rupture right now in us-russian relations if they continue on this path that they’re on. and in terms of a cold war, that depends. you have the vast majority of the rest of the world in total opposition to what he’s doing—from asia to south america to europe to acr-—around the world. and so, it’s going to be a cold day for russia. the idea—you don’t see a whole lot of people coming to his defense. i’m not prepared to comment on that at the moment. wait. no, no. (points to reporter.) yeah. no, no, no. he’s had his hand up a long time. well, if he did move into nato countries, he will be involved—we will be involved. the only thing that i’m convinced of is: if we don’t stop now, he’ll be emboldened. if we don’t move against him now with these significant sanctions, he will be emboldened. look, you know, every—well, anyway. i’m sorry, i can’t hear you. does the defense department of the united states — we’re going to be—we’re in consultation with—with india today. we haven’t resolved that completely. okay, thank you all very much. thank you. hello, poland! one of our great allies. president duda, prime minister — mr. prime minister, mr. mayor, and to all the former ministers and presidents, as well as mayors and polish political leaders from all across the country: thank you for welcoming me back to poland. you know, it was nearly one year ago, nearly one year ago i spoke at the royal castle here in warsaw, just weeks after vladimir putin had unleashed his murderous assault on ukraine. the largest land war in europe since world war two had begun. and the principles that had been the cornerstone of peace, prosperity, and stability on this planet for more than 75 years were at risk of being shattered. one year ago, the world was bracing for the fall of kyiv. well, i have just come from a visit to kyiv, and i can report: kyiv stands strong! kyiv stands proud. it stands tall. and most important, it stands free. when russia invaded, it wasn’t just ukraine being tested. the whole world faced a test for the ages. europe was being tested. america was being tested. nato was being tested. all democracies were being tested. and the questions we faced were as simple as they were profound. would we respond or would we look the other way? would we be strong or would we be weak? would be — we would — would we be — all of our allies — would be united or divided? one year later, we know the answer. we did respond. we would be strong. we would be united. and the world would not look the other way. we also faced fundamental questions about the commitment to the most basic of principles. would we stand up for the sovereignty of nations? would we stand up for the right of people to live free from naked aggression? would we stand up for democracy? one year later, we know the answers. yes, we would stand up for sovereignty. and we did. yes, we would stand up for the right of people to live free from aggression. and we did. and we would stand up for democracy. and we did. and yesterday, i had the honor to stand with president zelenskyy in kyiv to declare that we will keep standing up for these same things no matter what. when president putin ordered his tanks to roll into ukraine, he thought we would roll over. he was wrong. the ukrainian people are too brave. america, europe, a coalition of nations from the atlantic to the pacific — we were too unified. democracy was too strong. instead of an easy victory he perceived and predicted, putin left with burnt-out tanks and russia’s forces in delay — in disarray. he thought he’d get the finlandization of nato. instead, he got the natoization of finland — and sweden. he thought nato would fracture and divide. instead, nato is more united and more unified than ever — than ever before. he thought he could weaponize energy to crack your resolve — europe’s resolve. instead, we’re working together to end europe’s dependence on russian fossil fuels. he thought autocrats like himself were tough and leaders of democracies were soft. and then, he met the iron will of america and the nations everywhere that refused to accept a world governed by fear and force. he found himself at war with a nation led by a man whose courage would be forged in fire and steel: president zelenskyy. president putin — president putin is confronted with something today that he didn’t think was possible a year ago. the democracies of the world have grown stronger, not weaker. but the autocrats of the world have grown weaker, not stronger. because in the moments of great upheaval and uncertainty, that knowing what you stand for is most important, and knowing who stands with you makes all the difference. the people of poland know that. you know that. in fact, you know — you know it better than anyone here in poland. because that’s what solidarity means. through partition and oppression, when the beautiful city was destroyed after the warsaw uprising, during decades under the iron fist of communist rule, poland endured because you stood together. that’s how the brave leaders of the opposition and the people of belarus continue to fight for their democracy. that’s how the resolve of moldovan people — (applause) — resolve of the people of moldova to live in freedom gained them independence and put them on the path to eu membership. president sandu is here today. i’m not sure where she is. but i’m proud to stand with you and the freedom-loving people of moldova. give her a round of applause. one year into this war, putin no longer doubts the strength of our coalition. but he still doubts our conviction. he doubts our staying power. he doubts our continued support for ukraine. he doubts whether nato can remain unified. but there should be no doubt: our support for ukraine will not waver, nato will not be divided, and we will not tire. president putin’s craven lust for land and power will fail. and the ukrainian people’s love for their country will prevail. democracies of the world will stand guard over freedom today, tomorrow, and forever. for that’s what — that’s what’s at stake here: freedom. that’s the message i carried to kyiv yesterday, directly to the people of ukraine. when president zelenskyy said — he came to the united states in december — quote — he said this struggle will define the world and what our children and grandchildren — how they live, and then their children and grandchildren. he wasn’t only speaking about the children and grandchildren of ukraine. he was speaking about all of our children and grandchildren. yours and mine. we’re seeing again today what the people of poland and the people all across europe saw for decades: appetites of the autocrat cannot be appeased. they must be opposed. autocrats only understand one word: “no.” “no.” “no.” “no, you will not take my country.” “no, you will not take my freedom.” “no, you will not take my future.” and i’ll repeat tonight what i said last year in this same place: a dictator bent on rebuilding an empire will never be able to erase the people’s love of liberty. brutality will never grind down the will of the free. and ukraine — ukraine will never be a victory for russia. never. for free people refuse to live in a world of hopelessness and darkness. you know, this has been an extraordinary year in every sense. extraordinary brutality from russian forces and mercenaries. they have committed depravities, crimes against humanity, without shame or compunction. they’ve targeted civilians with death and destruction. used rape as a weapon of war. stolen ukrainian children in an attempt to — in an attempt to steal ukraine’s future. bombed train stations, maternity hospitals, schools, and orphanages. no one — no one can turn away their eyes from the atrocities russia is committing against the ukrainian people. it’s abhorrent. it’s abhorrent. but extraordinarily, as well, has been the response of the ukrainian people and the world. one year after the bombs began to fall and russian tanks rolled into ukraine, ukraine is still independent and free. from kherson to kharkiv, ukrainian fighters have reclaimed their land. in more than 50 percent of the territory russia held last year, the blue and the yellow flag of ukraine proudly waves once again. president zelenskyy still leads a democratically elected government that represents the will of the ukrainian people. and the world has already voted multiple times, including in the united nations general assembly, to condemn russia’s aggression and support a just peace. each time in the u.n., that vote has been overwhelming. in october, 143 nations in the united nations condemned russia’s illegal annexation. only four — four in the entire u.n. — voted with russia. four. so, tonight, i speak once more to the people of russia. the united states and the nations of europe do not seek to control or destroy russia. the west was not plotting to attack russia, as putin said today. and millions of russian citizens who only want to live in peace with their neighbors are not the enemy. this war was never a necessity; it’s a tragedy. president putin chose this war. every day the war continues is his choice. he could end the war with a word. it’s simple. if russia stopped invading ukraine, it would end the war. if ukraine stopped defending itself against russia, it would be the end of ukraine. that’s why, together, we’re making sure ukraine can defend itself. the united states has assembled a worldwide coalition of more than 50 nations to get critical weapons and supplies to the brave ukrainian fighters on the frontlines. air defense systems, artillery, ammunition, tanks, and armored vehicles. the european union and its member states have stepped up with unprecedented commitment to ukraine, not just in security assistance, but economic, and humanitarian, refugee assistance, and so much more. to all of you here tonight: take a moment. and i’m serious when i say this: turn on and look — turn around and look at one another. look at what you’ve done so far. poland is hosting more than 1.5 million refugees from this war. god bless you. poland’s generosity, your willingness to open your hearts and your homes, is extraordinary. and the american people are united in our resolve as well. all across my country, in big cities and small towns, ukrainian flags fly from american homes. over the past year, democrats and republicans in our united states congress have come together to stand for freedom. that’s who americans are, and that’s what americans do. the world is also coming together to address the global fallout from president putin’s war. putin tried to starve the world, blocking the ports in the black sea to stop ukraine from exporting its grain, exacerbating the global food crisis that hit developing nations in africa especially hard. instead, the united states and the g7 and partners around the world answered the call with historic commitments to address the crisis and to bolster global food supplies. and this week, my wife, jill biden, is traveling to africa to help bring attention to this critical issue. our commitment is to the people of ukraine and the future of ukraine — a ukraine that’s free, sovereign, and democratic. that was the dream of those who declared ukraine’s independence more than 30 years ago — who led the orange revolution and the revolution of dignity; who braved ice and fire on the maidan and the heavenly hundred who died there; and those who continue still to root out kremlin’s efforts to corrupt, coerce, and control. it’s a dream for those ukrainian patriots who have fought for years against russia’s aggressions in the donbas and the heroes who have given everything, given their lives, in the service of their beloved ukraine. i was honored to visit their memorial in kyiv yesterday to pay tribute to the sacrifice of those who lost their lives, standing alongside president zelenskyy. the united states and our partners stand with ukraine’s teachers, its hospital staff, its emergency responders, the workers in cities across ukraine who are fighting to keep the power on in the face of russia’s cruel bombardment. we stand with the millions of refugees of this war who have found a welcome in europe and the united states, particularly here in poland. ordinary people all across europe did whatever they could to help and continue to do so. polish businesses, civil society, cultural leaders — including the first lady of poland, who is here tonight — have led with the heart and determination, showcasing all that’s good about the human spirit. madam first lady, we love you. thank you all. i’ll never forget, last year, visiting with refugees from ukraine who had just arrived in warsaw, seeing their faces exhausted and afraid — holding their children so close, worrying they might never see their fathers, their husbands, their brothers or sisters again. in that darkest moment of their lives, you, the people of poland, offered them safety and light. you embraced them. you literally embraced them. i watched. i watched the looks on their faces. meanwhile, together we have made sure that russia is paying the price for its abuses. we continue to maintain the largest sanctions regime ever imposed on any country in history. and we’re going to announce more sanctions this week together with our partners. we’ll hold accountable those who are responsible for this war. and we will seek justice for the war crimes and crimes against humanity continuing to be committed by the russians. you know, there is much for us to be proud of over the — all that we have achieved together this past year. but we have to be honest and cleared-eyed as we look at the year ahead. the defense of freedom is not the work of a day or of a year. it’s always difficult. it’s always important. as ukraine continues to defend itself against the russian onslaught and launch counter-offensives of its own, there will continue to be hard and very bitter days, victories and tragedies. but ukraine is steeled for the fight ahead. and the united states, together with our allies and partners, are going to continue to have ukraine’s back as it defends itself. next year, i will host every member of nato for our 2024 summit in the united states. together, we’ll celebrate the 75th anniversary of the strongest defensive alliance in the history of the world — nato. and let there be no doubt, the commitment of the united states to our nato alliance and article 5 is rock solid. and every member of nato knows it. and russia knows it as well. an attack against one is an attack against all. it’s a sacred oath. a sacred oath to defend every inch of nato territory. over the past year, the united states has come together with our allies and partners in an extraordinary coalition to stand against russian aggression. but the work in front of us is not just what we’re against, it’s about what we’re for. what kind of world do we want to build? we need to take the strength and capacity of this coalition and apply it to lifting up — lifting up the lives of people everywhere, improving health, growing prosperity, preserving the planet, building peace and security, treating everyone with dignity and respect. that’s our responsibility. the democracies of the world have to deliver it for our people. as we gather tonight, the world, in my view, is at an — at an inflection point. the decisions we make over the next five years or so are going to determine and shape our lives for decades to come. that’s true for americans. it’s true for the people of the world. and while decisions are ours to make now, the principles and the stakes are eternal. a choice between chaos and stability. between building and destroying. between hope and fear. between democracy that lifts up the human spirit and the brutal hand of the dictator who crushes it. between nothing less than limitation and possibilities, the kind of possibilities that come when people who live not in captivity but in freedom. freedom. freedom. there is no sweeter word than freedom. there is no nobler goal than freedom. there is no higher aspiration than freedom. americans know that, and you know it. and all that we do now must be done so our children and grandchildren will know it as well. freedom. the enemy of the tyrant and the hope of the brave and the truth of the ages. freedom. stand with us. we will stand with you. let us move forward with faith and conviction and with an abiding commitment to be allies not of darkness, but of light. not of oppression, but of liberation. not of captivity, but, yes, of freedom. may god bless you all. may god protect our troops. and may god bless the heroes of ukraine and all those who defend freedom around the world. thank you, poland. thank you, thank you, thank you for what you’re doing. god bless you all. good afternoon. earlier today, i was briefed by our senior military and national security leaders on the status of the drawdown of u.s. forces and allied forces in afghanistan. when i announced our drawdown in april, i said we would be out by september, and we’re on track to meet that target. our military mission in afghanistan will conclude on august 31st. the drawdown is proceeding in a secure and orderly way, prioritizing the safety of our troops as they depart. our military commanders advised me that once i made the decision to end the war, we needed to move swiftly to conduct the main elements of the drawdown. and in this context, speed is safety. and thanks to the way in which we have managed our withdrawal, no one—no one u.s. forces or any forces have—have been lost. conducting our drawdown differently would have certainly come with an increased risk of safety to our personnel. to me, those risks were unacceptable. and there was never any doubt that our military would perform this task efficiently and with the highest level of professionalism. that’s what they do. and the same is true of our nato allies and partners who have supported—we are supporting, and supporting us as well, as they conclude their retrograde. i want to be clear: the u.s. military mission in afghanistan continues through the end of august. we remain—we retain personnel and capacities in the country, and we maintain some authority—excuse me, the same authority under which we’ve been operating for some time. as i said in april, the united states did what we went to do in afghanistan: to get the terrorists who attacked us on 9/11 and to deliver justice to osama bin laden, and to degrade the terrorist threat to keep afghanistan from becoming a base from which attacks could be continued against the united states. we achieved those objectives. that’s why we went. we did not go to afghanistan to nation-build. and it’s the right and the responsibility of the afghan people alone to decide their future and how they want to run their country. together, with our nato allies and partners, we have trained and equipped over three hu-—nearly 300,000 current serving members of the military—of the afghan national security force, and many beyond that who are no longer serving. add to that, hundreds of thousands more afghan national defense and security forces trained over the last two decades. we provided our afghan partners with all the tools—let me emphasize: all the tools, training, and equipment of any modern military. we provided advanced weaponry. and we’re going to continue to provide funding and equipment. and we’ll ensure they have the capacity to maintain their air force. but most critically, as i stressed in my meeting just two weeks ago with president ghani and chairman abdullah, afghan leaders have to come together and drive toward a future that the afghan people want and they deserve. in our meeting, i also assured ghani that u.s. support for the people of afghanistan will endure. we will continue to provide civilian and humanitarian assistance, including speaking out for the rights of women and girls. i intend to maintain our diplomatic presence in afghanistan, and we are coordinating closely with our international partners in order to continue to secure the international airport. and we’re going to engage in a determined diplomacy to pursue peace and a peace agreement that will end this senseless violence. i’ve asked secretary of state blinken and our special representative for afghanistan reconciliation to work vigorously with the parties in afghanistan, as well as the regional and international stakeholders to support a negotiated solution. to be clear—to be clear: countries in the region have an essential role to play in supporting a peaceful settlement. we’ll work with them, and they should help step up their efforts as well. we’re going to continue to work for the release of detained americans, including mark—excuse me—fre– frerichs—i want to pronounce the name correctly; i mis-—i misspoke—so that he can return to his family safely. we’re also going to continue to make sure that we take on the afghan nationals who work side-by-side with u.s. forces, including interpreters and translators—since we’re no longer going to have military there after this; we’re not going to need them and they have no jobs—who are also going to be vital to our efforts so they—and they’ve been very vital—and so their families are not exposed to danger as well. we’ve already dramatically accelerated the procedure time for special immigrant visas to bring them to the united states. since i was inaugurated on january 20th, we’ve already approved 2,500 special immigrant visas to come to the united states. up to now, fewer than half have exercised their right to do that. half have gotten on aircraft and com—commercial flights and come, and the other half believe they want to stay—at least thus far. we’re working closely with congress to change the authorization legislation so that we can streamline the process of approving those visas. and those who have stood up for the operation to physically relocate thousands of afghans and their families before the u.s. military mission concludes so that, if they choose, they can wait safely outside of afghanistan while their u.s. visas are being processed. the operation has identified u.s. facilities outside of the continental united states, as well as in third countries, to host our afghan allies, if they ch-—if they so choose. and, starting this month, we’re going to begin to re-—re-—reloc-—we’re going to begin relocation flights for afghanistan siv applicants and their families who choose to leave. we have a point person in the white house and at the state department-led task force coordinating all these efforts. but our message to those women and men is clear: there is a home for you in the united states if you so choose, and we will stand with you just as you stood with us. when i made the decision to end the u.s. military involvement in afghanistan, i judged that it was not in the national interest of the united states of america to continue fighting this war indefinitely. i made the decision with clear eyes, and i am briefed daily on the battlefield updates. but for those who have argued that we should stay just six more months or just one more year, i ask them to consider the lessons of recent history. in 2011, the nato allies and partners agreed that we would end our combat mission in 2014. in 2014, some argued, “one more year.” so we kept fighting, and we kept taking casualties. in 2015, the same. and on and on. nearly 20 years of experience has shown us that the current security situation only confirms that “just one more year” of fighting in afghanistan is not a solution but a recipe for being there indefinitely. it’s up to afghans to make the decision about the future of their country. others are more direct. their argument is that we should stay with the afghan—in afghanistan indefinitely. in doing so, they point to the fact that we—we have not taken losses in this last year, so they claim that the cost of just maintaining the status quo is minimal. but that ignores the reality and the facts that already presented on the ground in afghanistan when i took office: the taliban was at its strongest mil-—is at its strongest militarily since 2001. the number of u.s. forces in afghanistan had been reduced to a bare minimum. and the united states, in the last administration, made an agreement that the—with the taliban to remove all our forces by may 1 of this past—of this year. that’s what i inherited. that agreement was the reason the taliban had ceased major attacks against u.s. forces. if, in april, i had instead announced that the united states was going to back—going back on that agreement made by the last administration—[that] the united states and allied forces would remain in afghanistan for the foreseeable future—the taliban would have again begun to target our forces. the status quo was not an option. staying would have meant u.s. troops taking casualties; american men and women back in the middle of a civil war. and we would have run the risk of having to send more troops back into afghanistan to defend our remaining troops. once that agreement with the taliban had been made, staying with a bare minimum force was no longer possible. so let me ask those who wanted us to stay: how many more—how many thousands more of america’s daughters and sons are you willing to risk? how long would you have them stay? already we have members of our military whose parents fought in afghanistan 20 years ago. would you send their children and their grandchildren as well? would you send your own son or daughter? after 20 years—a trillion dollars spent training and equipping hundreds of thousands of afghan national security and defense forces, 2,448 americans killed, 20,722 more wounded, and untold thousands coming home with unseen trauma to their mental health—i will not send another generation of americans to war in afghanistan with no reasonable expectation of achieving a different outcome. the united states cannot afford to remain tethered to policies creating a response to a world as it was 20 years ago. we need to meet the threats where they are today. today, the terrorist threat has metastasized beyond afghanistan. so, we are repositioning our resources and adapting our counterterrorism posture to meet the threats where they are now significantly higher: in south asia, the middle east, and africa. but make no mistake: our military and intelligence leaders are confident they have the capabilities to protect the homeland and our interests from any resurgent terrorist challenge emerging or emanating from afghanistan. we are developing a counterterrorism over-the-horizon capability that will allow us to keep our eyes firmly fixed on any direct threats to the united states in the region, and act quickly and decisively if needed. and we also need to focus on shoring up america’s core strengths to meet the strategic competition with china and other nations that is really going to determine—determine our future. we have to defeat covid-19 at home and around the world, make sure we’re better prepared for the next pandemic or biological threat. we need to establish international norms for cyberspace and the use of emergenc-—emerging technologies. we need to take concerted action to fight existential threats of climate change. and we will be more formidable to our adversaries and competitors over the long run if we fight the battles of the next 20 years, not the last 20 years. finally, i want to recognize the incredible sacrifice and dedication that the u.s. military and civilian personnel, serving alongside our allies and partners, have made over the last two decades in afghanistan. i want to honor the significance of what they’ve accomplished and the great personal risk they encountered and the incredible cost to their families: pursuing the terrorist threat in some of the most unforgiving terrain on the planet—and i’ve been almost throughout that entire country; ensuring there hasn’t been another attack on the homeland from afghanistan for the last 20 years; taking out bin laden. i want to thank you all for your service and the dedication to the mission so many of you have given, and to the sacrifices that you and your families have made over the long course of this war. we’ll never forget those who gave the last full measure of devotion for their country in afghanistan, nor those whose lives have been immeasurably altered by wounds sustained in service to their country. we’re ending america’s longest war, but we’ll always, always honor the bravery of the american patriots who served in it. may god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. thank you. no, it is not. because you—the afghan troops have 300,000 well-equipped—as well-equipped as any army in the world—and an air force against something like 75,000 taliban. it is not inevitable. you—is that a serious question? no, i do not. no, i do not trust the taliban. it’s a—it’s a silly question. do i trust the taliban? no. but i trust the capacity of the afghan military, who is better trained, better equipped, and more re-—more competent in terms of conducting war.yes, ma’am. you know my record. i can tell by the way you asked the question. i opposed permanently having american forces in afghanistan. i argued, from the beginning, as you may recall—it came to light after the administration was over, last—our administration—no nation has ever unified afghanistan. no nation. empires have gone there and not done it. the focus we had—and i strongly support it—and you may remember i physically went to afghanistan. i was up in that pass where osama bin laden was—allegedly escaped or—out of harm’s way. we went for two reasons: one, to bring osama bin laden to the gates of hell, as i said at the time. the second reason was to eliminate al qaeda’s capacity to deal with more attacks on the united states from that territory. we accomplished both of those objectives—period. that’s what i believed, from the beginning, why we should be and why we should have gone to afghanistan. that job had been over for some time. and that’s why i believe that this is the right decision and, quite frankly, overdue. that is not true. that is not true. they did not—they didn’t—did not reach that conclusion. the afghan government and leadership has to come together. they clearly have the capacity to sustain the government in place. the question is: will they generate the kind of cohesion to do it? it’s not a question of whether they have the capacity. they have the capacity. they have the forces. they have the equipment. the question is: will they do it? and i want to make clear what i made clear to ghani: that we are not going just sus-—walk away and not sustain their ability to maintain that force. we are. we’re going to also work to make sure we help them in terms of everything from food necessities and other things in—in the region. but—but, there’s not a conclusion that, in fact, they cannot defeat the taliban. i believe the only way there’s going to be—this is now joe biden, not the intelligence community—the only way there’s ultimately going to be peace and security in afghanistan is that they work out a modus vivendi with the taliban and they make a judgment as to how they can make peace. and the likelihood there’s going to be one unified government in afghanistan controlling the whole country is highly unlikely. look, you’ve said two things—one, that if it could result in a civil war—that’s different than the taliban succeeding, number one. number two, the question of what will be done is going to be implicated—is going to implicate the entire region as well. there’s a number of countries who have a grave concern about what’s going to happen in afghanistan relative to their security. the question is: how much of a threat to the united states of america and to our allies is whatever results in terms of a government or an agreement? that’s when that judgement will be made. none whatsoever. zero. what you had is—you had entire brigades breaking through the gates of our embassy—six, if i’m not mistaken. the taliban is not the south—the north vietnamese army. they’re not—they’re not remotely comparable in terms of capability. there’s going to be no circumstance where you see people being lifted off the roof of an embassy in the—of the united states from afghanistan. it is not at all comparable. i’ll take him and then i’ll—and then i’ll go—i’ll go to the other side. hang on a second. well, first of all, the mission hasn’t failed, yet. there is in afghanistan—in all parties, there’s been corruption. the question is, can there be an agreement on unity of purpose? what is the objective? for example, it started off—there were going to be negotiations between the taliban and the afghan national security forces and the afghan government. that—that of—it didn’t come to—it didn’t come to fruition. so the question now is, where do they go from here? that—the jury is still out. but the likelihood there’s going to be the taliban overrunning everything and owning the whole country is highly unlikely. yes, ma’am. no. no, no, no. it’s up to the people of afghanistan to decide on what government they want, not us to impose the government on them. no country has ever been able to do that. keep in mind, as a student of history, as i’m sure you are, never has afghanistan been a united country, not in all of its history. not in all of its history. no, there’s no “mission accomplished.” the mission was accomplished in that we get—got osama bin laden, and terrorism is not emanating from that part of the world. well, much of it has already happened. there’s already been people—about a thousand people have gotten on aircraft and come home—come to the united states already on commercial aircraft. so, as i said, there’s over 2,500 people that as—from january to now, have gotten those visas. and only half decided that they wanted to leave. the point is that i think the whole process has to be speeded up, period, in terms of being able to get these visas. because the law doesn’t allow that to happen. and that’s why we’re asking the congress to consider changing the law. but in the meantime, we can guarantee their safety, if they wish to leave, by taking them to third countries and/or, while the wait is taking place, to come to—to—and hopefully, while they’re waiting there, to be able to bring them back to the united states, if that’s what they choose to do. they are very concerned, with good reason. when i was in afghanistan—i’ve been there a number of times—i remember being in a school outside and—and, by the way, the schools in afghanistan are not fundamentally unlike schools in the west coast, where they have, you know, a—an area in the middle that is sort of like—it looks like a playground and single-story buildings connected around it. and i remember saying to—speaking to a group of young women—i guess they were roughly—don’t hold me to this—they look like they’d be 14, 15 years old. and they’re in school, and there’s a tiered classroom with single light bulbs hanging from the ceiling, as i know you know. and i said, “you know, the united states came here to make sure that we got this terrorist, osama bin laden, and that terrorists didn’t amass again to—to go after our country. and then we’re going to have to leave.” and a young woman said, “you can’t leave. you can’t leave.” it was—it was heartbreaking. “you can’t leave,” she said. “i want to be a doctor. i want to be a doctor. i want to be a doctor. if you leave, i’ll never be able to be a doctor.” well, that’s why we spent so much time and money training the afghan security forces to do the work of defending that. if every work — well, anyway—so, yes, i’m aware. i’m going to take one more question. relative to the training and capacity of the ansf and the training of the federal police, they’re not even close in terms of their capacity. i was making the point—the point was that here we were; i was—the argument is, “well, we could stay because no one was dying. no americans are being shot. so why leave?” once the agreement was made by the last administration that we were going to leave by may 1st, it was very clear that a taliban that had always been a problem was even a more sophisticated problem than they were than before. not more sophisticated than the ansf, the government. more than they were. the point being that it would have increased the prospect that they would have been able to take more lives of americans if they decided we weren’t going to go after them. that was the point i was making. thank you all so very much. thank you. thank you. (applause.) thank you. thank you. good to be back. and mitch and chuck will understand it’s good to be almost home, down the hall. anyway, thank you all. madam speaker, madam vice president—(applause)—no president has ever said those words from this podium. no president has ever said those words, and it’s about time. (applause.) first lady—(applause)—i’m her husband; second gentleman; chief justice; members of the united states congress and the cabinet; distinguished guests; my fellow americans: while the setting tonight is familiar, this gathering is just a little bit different—a reminder of the extraordinary times we’re in. throughout our history, presidents have come to this chamber to speak to congress, to the nation, and to the world to declare war, to celebrate peace, to announce new plans and possibilities. tonight, i come to talk about crisis and opportunity, about rebuilding the nation, revitalizing our democracy, and winning the future for america. i stand here tonight, one day shy of the 100th day of my administration—100 days since i took the oath of office and lifted my hand off our family bible and inherited a nation—we all did—that was in crisis. the worst pandemic in a century. the worst economic crisis since the great depression. the worst attack on our democracy since the civil war. now, after just 100 days, i can report to the nation: america is on the move again—(applause)—turning peril into possibility, crisis to opportunity, setbacks into strength. we all know life can knock us down. but in america, we never, ever, ever stay down. americans always get up. today, that’s what we’re doing: america is rising anew, choosing hope over fear, truth over lies, and light over darkness. after 100 days of rescue and renewal, america is ready for takeoff, in my view. we’re working again, dreaming again, discovering again, and leading the world again. we have shown each other and the world that there’s no quit in america—none. one hundred days ago, america’s house was on fire. we had to act. and thanks to the extraordinary leadership of speaker pelosi; malor-—majority leader schumer; and the overwhelming support of the american people—democrats, independents, and republicans—we did act. together we passed the american rescue plan—one of the most consequential rescue packages in american history. we’re already seeing the results. (applause.) we’re already seeing the results. after i promised we’d get 100 million covid-19 vaccine shots into people’s arms in 100 days, we will have provided over 220 million covid shots in those 100 days. (applause.) thanks to all the help of all of you, we’re marshalling—with your help, everyone’s help—we’re marshalling every federal resource. we’ve gotten vaccines to nearly 40,000 pharmacies and over 700 community health centers where the poorest of the poor can be reached. we’re setting up community vaccination sites, developing mobile units to get to hard-to-reach communities. today, 90 percent of americans now live within five miles of a vaccination site. everyone over the age of 16—everyone is now eligible to get vaccinated right now, right away. (applause.) go get vaccinated, america. go and get the vaccination. they’re available. you’re eligible now. when i was sworn in on january 20th, less than 1 percent of the seniors in america were fully vaccinated against covid-19. one hundred days later, 70 percent of seniors in america over 65 are protected—fully protected. senior deaths from covid-19 are down 80 percent since january—down 80 percent because of all of you. and more than half of all the adults in america have gotten at least one shot. at a mass vaccination center in glendale, arizona, i asked a nurse—i said, “what’s it like?” she looked at me and she said, “it’s like every shot is giving a dose of hope”—was the phrase. “a dose of hope.” a dose of hope for an educator in florida who has a child suffering from an autoimmune disease—wrote to me, said she’s worried—that she was worrying about bringing the virus home. she said she then got vaccinated at a—at a large site, in her car. she said she sat in her car, when she got vaccinated, and just cried—cried out of joy and cried out of relief. parents see the smiles on their kids’ faces, for those who are able to go back to school because the teachers and school bus drivers and cafeteria workers have been vaccinated. grandparents hugging their children and grandchildren instead of pressing hands against a window to say goodbye. it means everything. those things mean everything. you know, there’s still—you all know it; you know it better than any group of americans—there’s still more work to do to beat this virus. we can’t let our guard down. but tonight i can say it: because of you, the american people, our progress these past 100 days against one of the worst pandemics in history has been one of the greatest logistical achievements—logistical achievements this country has ever seen. what else have we done in those first 100 days? we kept our commitment—democrats and republicans—of sending $1,400 rescue checks to 85 percent of american households. we’ve already sent more than one—160 million checks out the door. it’s making the difference. you all know it when you go home. for many people, it’s making all the difference in the world. a single mom in texas who wrote to me, she said she couldn’t work, but she said the relief check put food on the table and saved her and her son from eviction from their apartment. a grandmother in virginia who told me she immediately took her granddaughter to the eye doctor—something she said she put off for months because she didn’t have the money. one of the defining images, at least from my perspective, of this crisis has been cars lined up—cars lined up for miles. and not—not people who just barely ever start those cars—nice cars lined up for miles, waiting for a box of food to be put in their trunk. i don’t know about you, but i didn’t ever think i’d see that in america. and all of this is through no fault of their own. no fault of their own these people are in this position. that’s why the rescue plan is delivering food and nutrition assistance to millions of americans facing hunger, and hunger is down sharply already. we’re also providing rental assistance—you all know this, but the american people, i want to make sure they understand—keeping people from being evicted from their homes, providing loans to small businesses to reopen and keep their employees on the job. during these 100 days, an additional 800,000 americans enrolled in the affordable care act when i established the special sign-up period to do that—800,000 in that period. we’re making one of the largest one-time ever investments—ever—in improving healthcare for veterans. critical investments to address the opioid crisis. and, maybe most importantly, thanks to the american rescue plan, we’re on track to cut child poverty in america in half this year. (applause.) and in the process, while this was all going on, the economy created more than 1,300,000 new jobs in 100 days—more jobs in the first—(applause)—more jobs in the first 100 days than any president on record. the international monetary fund—(applause)—the international monetary fund is now estimating our economy will grow at a rate of more than 6 percent this year. that will be the fastest pace of economic growth in this country in nearly four decades. america is moving—moving forward—but we can’t stop now. we’re in competition with china and other countries to win the 21st century. we’re at a great inflection point in history. we have to do more than just build back better—i mean “build back.” we have to build back better. we have to compete more strenuously than we have. throughout our history, if you think about it, public investment and infrastructure has literally transformed america—our attitudes, as well as our opportunities. the transcontinental railroad, the interstate highways united two oceans and brought a totally new age of progress to the united states of america. universal public schools and college aid opened wide the doors of opportunity. scientific breakthroughs took us to the moon—now we’re on mars; discovering vaccines; gave us the internet and so much more. these are the investments we made together as one country, and investments that only the government was in a position to make. time and again, they propel us into the future. that’s why i proposed the american jobs plan—a once-in-a-generation investment in america itself. this is the largest jobs plan since world war two. it creates jobs to upgrade our transportation infrastructure; jobs modernizing our roads, bridges, highways; jobs building ports and airports, rail corridors, transit lines. it’s clean water. and, today, up to 10 million homes in america and more than 400,000 schools and childcare centers have pipes with lead in them, including in drinking water—a clear and present danger to our children’s health. the american jobs plan creates jobs replacing 100 percent of the nation’s lead pipes and service lines so every american can drink clean water. (applause.) and in the process, it will create thousands and thousands of good-paying jobs. it creates jobs connecting every american with high-speed internet, including 35 percent of the rural america that still doesn’t have it. this is going to help our kids and our businesses succeed in the 21st-century economy. and i am asking the vice president to lead this effort, if she would — —because i know it will get done. (applause.) it creates jobs, building a modern power grid. our grids are vulnerable to storms, hacks, catastrophic failures—with tragic results, as we saw in texas and elsewhere during the winter storms. the american jobs plan will create jobs that will lay thousands of miles of transmission lines needed to build a resilient and fully clean grid. we can do that. (applause.) look, the american jobs plan will help millions of people get back to their jobs and back to their careers. two million women have dropped out of the workforce during this pandemic—two million. and too often because they couldn’t get the care they needed to care for their child or care for an elderly parent who needs help. eight hundred thousand families are on a medicare waiting list right now to get homecare for their aging parent or loved one with a disability. if you think it’s not important, check out in your own district. democrat or republican—democrat or republican voters, their great concern—almost as much as their children—is taking care of an elderly loved one who can’t be left alone. medicaid contemplated it, but this plan is going to help those families and create jobs for our caregivers with better wages and better benefits, continuing a cycle of growth. for too long, we’ve failed to use the most important word when it comes to meeting the climate crisis: “jobs.” jobs. jobs. (applause.) for me, when i think “climate change,” i think “jobs.” the american jobs plan will put engineers and construction workers to work building more energy-efficient buildings and homes. electrical workers—ibew members—installing 500,000 charging stations along our highways so we can own—(applause)—so we can own the electric car market. (applause.) farmers—farmers planting cover crops so they can reduce the carbon dioxide in the air and get paid for doing it. (applause.) look, but think about it: there is simply no reason why the blades for wind turbines can’t be built in pittsburgh instead of beijing. no reason. none. no reason. (applause.) so, folks, there’s no reason why american—american workers can’t lead the world in the production of electric vehicles and batteries. i mean, there is no reason. we have this capacity. (applause.) we have the brightest, best-trained people in the world. the american jobs plan is going to create millions of good-paying jobs—jobs americans can raise a family on—as my dad would then say, “with a little breathing room.” and all the investments in the american jobs plan will be guided by one principle: buy american. (applause.) buy american. and i might note, parenthetically—(applause)—that does not—that does not violate any trade agreement. it’s been the law since the ’30s: buy american. american tax dollars are going to be used to buy american products made in america to create american jobs. that’s the way it’s supposed to be and it will be in this administration. (applause.) and i made it clear to all my cabinet people. their ability to give exemptions has been exstrenuously [sic] limited. it will be american products. now i know some of you at home are wondering whether these jobs are for you. so many of you—so many of the folks i grew up with feel left behind, forgotten in an economy that’s so rapidly changing. it’s frightening. i want to speak directly to you. because if you think about it, that’s what people are most worried about: “can i fit in?” independent experts estimate the american jobs plan will add millions of jobs and trillions of dollars to economic growth in the years to come. it is a—it is an eight-year program. these are good-paying jobs that can’t be outsourced. nearly 90 percent of the infrastructure jobs created in the american jobs plan do not require a college degree; 75 percent don’t require an associate’s degree. the american jobs plan is a blue-collar blueprint to build america. that’s what it is. (applause.) and it recognizes something i’ve always said in this chamber and the other. good guys and women on wall street, but wall street didn’t build this country. the middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class. (applause.) so that’s why i’m calling on congress to pass the protect the right to organize act—the pro act—and send it to my desk so we can support the right to unionize. (applause.) and, by the way, while you’re thinking about sending things to my desk—(laughs)—let’s raise the minimum wage to $15. (applause.) no one—no one working 40 hours a week—no one working 40 hours a week should live below the poverty line. we need to ensure greater equity and opportunity for women. and while we’re doing this, let’s get the paycheck fairness act to my desk as well—equal pay. it’s been much too long. and if you’re wondering whether it’s too long, look behind me. (applause.) and finally, the american jobs plan will be the biggest increase in nondefense research and development on record. we will see more technological change—and some of you know more about this than i do—we’ll see more technological change in the next 10 years than we saw in the last 50. that’s how rapidly artificial intelligence and so much more is changing. and we’re falling behind the competition with the rest of the world. decades ago, we used to invest 2 percent of our gross domestic product in america—2 percent of our gross domestic product—in research and development. today, mr. secretary, that’s less than 1 percent. china and other countries are closing in fast. we have to develop and dominate the products and technologies of the future: advanced batteries, biotechnology, computer chips, clean energy. the secretary of defense can tell you—and those of you on—who work on national security issues know—the defense department has an agency called darpa—the defense advanced research project agency. the people who set up before i came here—and that’s been a long time ago—to develop breakthroughs that enhance our national security -– that’s their only job. and it’s a semi-separate agency; it’s under the defense department. it’s led to everything from the discovery of the internet to gps and so much more that has enhanced our security. the national institute of health—the nih –- i believe, should create a similar advanced research projects agency for health. (applause.) and that would—here’s what it would do. it would have a singular purpose: to develop breakthroughs to prevent, detect, and treat diseases like alzheimer’s, diabetes, and cancer. i’ll still never forget when we passed the cancer proposal the last year i was vice president—almost $9 million going to nih. and if you excuse the point of personal privilege, i’ll never forget you standing and mentioning—saying you’d name it after my deceased son. it meant a lot. but so many of us have deceased sons, daughters, and relatives who died of cancer. i can think of no more worthy investment. i know of nothing that is more bipartisan. so, let’s end cancer as we know it. (applause.) it’s within our power. (applause.) it’s within our power to do it. (applause.) investments in jobs and infrastructure, like the ones we’re talking about, have often had bipartisan support in the past. vice president harris and i met regularly in the oval office with democrats and republicans to discuss the jobs plan. and i applaud a group of republican senators who just put forward their own proposal. so, let’s get to work. i wanted to lay out, before the congress, my plan before we got into the deep discussions. i’d like to meet with those who have ideas that are different—they think are better. i welcome those ideas. but the rest of the world is not waiting for us. i just want to be clear: from my perspective, doing nothing is not an option. (applause.) look, we can’t be so busy competing with one another that we forget the competition that we have with the rest of the world to win the 21st century. secretary blinken can tell you, i spent a lot of time with president xi—traveled over 17,000 miles with him; spent, they tell me, over 24 hours in private discussions with him. when he called to congratulate me, we had a two-hour discussion. he’s deadly earnest about becoming the most significant, consequential nation in the world. he and others—autocrats—think that democracy can’t compete in the 21st century with autocracies because it takes too long to get consensus. to win that competition for the future, in my view, we also need to make a once-in-a-generation investment in our families and our children. that’s why i’ve introduced the american families plan tonight, which addresses four of the biggest challenges facing american families and, in turn, america. first is access to a good education. when this nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best-educated, best-prepared nation in the world. it’s, i believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century. but the world has caught up, or catching up. they are not waiting. i would say, parenthetically: if we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, “okay, we’re going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education,” i wonder whether we’d think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. i doubt it. twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. that’s why my american families plan guarantees four additional years of public education for every person in america, starting as early as we can. the great universities of this country have conducted studies over the last 10 years. it shows that adding two years of universal high-quality preschool for every three-year-old and four-year-old, no matter what background they come from, it puts them in the position to be able to compete all the way through 12 years. it increases exponentially their prospect of graduating and going on beyond graduation. the research shows when a young child goes to school—not daycare—they are far more likely to graduate from high school and go to college or something after high school. when you add two years of free community college on top of that, you begin to change the dynamic. (applause.) we can do that. (applause.) and we’ll increase pell grants and invest in historical black colleges and universities, tribal colleges, minority-serving institutions. the reason is: they don’t have the endowments, but their students are just as capable of learning about cybersecurity, just as capable of learning about metallurgy—all the things that are going on that provide those jobs of the future. jill was a community college professor who teaches today as first lady. she has long said—(applause). she has long—(applause). if i’ve heard it once, i’ve heard it a thousand times: “joe, any country that out-educates us is going to outcompete us.” she’ll be deeply involved in leading this effort. thank you, jill. second thing we need: american families plan will provide access to quality, affordable childcare. we guarantee—(applause). and i’m proposing a legislation to guarantee that low- and middle-income families will pay no more than 7 percent of their income for high-quality care for children up to the age of 5. the most hard-pressed working families won’t have to spend a dime. third, the american families plan will finally provide up to 12 weeks of paid leave and medical leave—family and medical leave. we’re one of the few industrial countries in the world—(applause). no one should have to choose between a job and paycheck or taking care of themselves and their loved ones –- a parent, a spouse, or child. and fourth, the american family plan puts directly into the pockets of millions of americans. in march, we expanded a tax credit for every child in a family. up to a $3,000 per child if they’re under [over] six years of age—i mean, excuse me—under—over six years of age, and $3,600 for children over [under] six years of age. with two parents, two kids, that’s $7,200 in the pockets that’s going to help to take care of your family. and that will help more than 65 million children and help cut childcare [child] poverty in half. (applause.) and we can afford it. so we did that in the rec-—in the—in the last piece of legislation we passed. but let’s extend that child care tax credit at least through the end of 2025. (applause.) the american rescue plan lowered healthcare premiums for 9 million americans who buy their coverage under the affordable care act. i know that’s really popular on this side of the aisle. (laughter.) but let’s make that provision permanent so their premiums don’t go back up. (applause.) in addition to my families plan, i’m going to work with congress to address, this year, other critical priorities for american families. the affordable care act has been a lifeline for millions of americans, protecting people with preexisting conditions, protecting women’s health. and the pandemic has demonstrated how badly—how badly it’s needed. let’s lower deductibles for working families on the affordable care—in the affordable care act. (applause.) and let’s lower prescription drug costs. (applause.) we know how to do this. the last president had that as an objective. we all know how outrageously expensive drugs are in america. in fact, we pay the highest prescription drug prices of anywhere in the world right here in america—nearly three times—for the same drug, nearly three times what other countries pay. we have to change that, and we can. let’s do what we’ve always talked about for all the years i was down here in this—in this body—in congress. let’s give medicare the power to save hundreds of billions of dollars by negotiating lower drug prescription prices. (applause.) and, by the way, that won’t just—that won’t just help people on medicare; it will lower prescription drug costs for everyone. and the money we save, which is billions of dollars, can go to strengthen the affordable care act and expand medicare coverage benefits without costing taxpayers an additional penny. it’s within our power to do it; let’s do it now. (applause.) we’ve talked about it long enough. democrats and republicans, let’s get it done this year. this is all about a simple premise: healthcare should be a right, not a privilege in america. (applause.) so, how do we pay for my jobs and family plan? i made it clear, we can do it without increasing the deficits. let’s start with what i will not do: i will not impose any tax increase on people making less than $400,000. it’s—but it’s time for corporate america and the wealthiest 1 percent of americans to just begin to pay their fair share. (applause.) just their fair share. sometimes i have arguments with my friends in the democratic party. i think you should be able to become a billionaire and a millionaire, but pay your fair share. a recent study shows that 55 of the nation’s biggest corporations paid zero federal tax last year. those 55 corporations made in excess of $40 billion in profit. a lot of companies also evade taxes through tax havens in switzerland and bermuda and the cayman islands. and they benefit from tax loopholes and deductions for offshoring jobs and shifting profits overseas. it’s not right. we’re going to reform corporate taxes so they pay their fair share and help pay for the public investments their businesses will benefit from as well. (applause.) we’re going to reward work, not just wealth. we take the top tax bracket for the wealthiest 1 percent of americans—those making over $400,000 or more—back up to where it was when george w. bush was president when he started: 39.6 percent. that’s where it was when george w. was president. we’re going to get rid of the loopholes that allow americans who make more than a million dollars a year and pay a lower tax rate on their capital gains than americans who receive a paycheck. we’re only going to affect three tenths of 1 percent of all americans by that action. three tenths of 1 percent. and the irs is going to crack down on millionaires and billionaires who cheat on their taxes. it’s estimated to be billions of dollars by think tanks that are left, right, and center. i’m not looking to punish anybody. but i will not add a tax burden—an additional tax burden to the middle class in this country. they’re already paying enough. i believe what i propose is fair—(applause)—fiscally responsible, and it raises revenue to pay for the plans i have proposed, and will create millions of jobs that will grow the economy and enhance our financial standing in the country. when you hear someone say that they don’t want to raise taxes on the wealthiest 1 percent or corporate america, ask them: “whose taxes you want to raise instead? whose are you going to cut?” look, the big tax cut of 2017—remember, it was supposed to pay for itself—that was how it was sold—and generate vast economic growth. instead, it added $2 trillion to the deficit. it was a huge windfall for corporate america and those at the very top. instead of using the tax saving to raise wages and invest in research and development, it poured billions of dollars into the pockets of ceos. in fact, the pay gap between ceos and their workers is now among the largest in history. according to one study, ceos make 320 times what the average worker in their corporation makes. it used to be in the—below a hundred. the pandemic has only made things worse. twenty million americans lost their job in the pandemic—working- and middle-class americans. at the same time, roughly 650 billionaires in america saw their net worth increase by more than $1 trillion—in the same exact period. let me say it again: 650 people increased their wealth by more than $1 trillion during this pandemic. and they’re now worth more than $4 trillion. my fellow americans, trickle-down—trickle-down economics has never worked and it’s time to grow the economy from the bottom and the middle out. (applause.) you know, there’s a broad consensus of economists—left, right, center—and they agree what i’m proposing will help create millions of jobs and generate historic economic growth. these are among the highest-value investments we can make as a nation. i’ve often said: our greatest strength is the power of our example, not just the example of our power. in my conversations with world leaders—and i’ve spoken to over 38, 40 of them now—i’ve made it known—i’ve made it known that america is back. and you know what they say? the comment that i hear most of all from them is they say, “we see america is back but for how long? but for how long?” my fellow americans, we have to show not just that we’re back, but that we’re back to stay and that we aren’t going to go it alone. (applause.) we’re going to do it by leading with our allies. (applause.) no one nation can deal with all the crises of our time—from terrorism, to nuclear proliferation, mass migration, cybersecurity, climate change, as well as experi-—what we’re experiencing now with pandemics. there’s no wall high enough to keep any virus out. and our own vaccine supply—as it grows to meet our needs; and we’re meeting them—will become an arsenal of vaccines for other countries, just as america was the arsenal of democracy for the world—(applause)—and in consequence, influenced the world. (applause.) but every american will have access before that occur-—every american will have access to be fully covered by covid-19—from the vaccines we have. look, the climate crisis is not our fight alone; it’s a global fight. the united states accounts, as all of you know, less than 15 percent of carbon emissions. the rest of the world accounts for 85 percent. that’s why i kept my commitment to rejoin the paris accord—because if we do everything perfectly, it’s not going to ultimately matter. i kept my commitment to convene a climate summit right here in america with all of the major economies of the world—china, russia, india, the european union—and i said i’d do it in my first 100 days. i want to be very blunt about it: i had—my attempt was to make sure that the world could see there was a consensus, that we are at an inflection point in history. and consensus—the consensus is: if we act to save the planet, we can create millions of jobs and economic growth and opportunity to raise the standard of living to almost everyone around the world. if you’ve watched any of it—and you were all busy; i’m sure you didn’t have much time—that’s what virtually every nation said, even the ones that aren’t doing their fair share. the investments i’ve proposed tonight also advance the foreign policy, in my view, that benefits the middle class. that means making sure every nation plays by the same rules in the global economy, including china. in my discussions—in my discussions with president xi, i told him, “we welcome the competition. we’re not looking for conflict.” but i made absolutely clear that we will defend america’s interests across the board. america will stand up to unfair trade practices that undercut american workers and american industries, like subsidies from state—to state-owned operations and enterprises and the theft of american technology and intellectual property. i also told president xi that we’ll maintain a strong military presence in the indo-pacific, just as we do with nato in europe—not to start a conflict, but to prevent one. (applause.) i told him what i’ve said to many world leaders: that america will not back away from our commitments—our commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms and to our alliances. and i pointed out to him: no responsible american president could remain silent when basic human rights are being so blatantly violated. an american president—president has to represent the essence of what our country stands for. america is an idea—the most unique idea in history: we are created, all of us, equal. it’s who we are, and we cannot walk away from that principle and, in fact, say we’re dealing with the american idea. with regard to russia, i know it concerns some of you, but i made very clear to putin that we’re not going to seek esca-—ecala-—exc-—excuse me—escalation, but their actions will have consequence if they turn out to be true. and they turned out to be true, so i responded directly and proportionally to russia’s interference in our elections and the cyberattacks on our government and our business. they did both of these things, and i told them we would respond, and we have. but we can also cooperate when it’s in our mutual interest. we did it when we extended the new start treaty on nuclear arms, and we’re working to do it on climate change. but he understands we will respond. on iran and north korea—nuclear programs that present serious threats to american security and the security of the world—we’re going to be working closely with our allies to address the threats posed by both of these countries through di-—through diplomacy, as well as stern deterrence. and american leadership means ending the forever war in afghanistan. (applause.) we have—(applause)—we have, without hyperbole, the greatest fighting force in the history of the world. i’m the first president in 40 years who knows what it means to have a son serving in a warzone. today we have servicemembers serving in the same warzone as their parents did. we have servicemembers in afghanistan who were not yet born on 9/11. the war in afghanistan, as we remember the debates here, were never meant to be multi-generational undertakings of nation-building. we went to afghanistan to get terrorists—the terrorists who attacked us on 9/11—and we said we would follow osama bin laden to the gates of hell to do it. if you’ve been to the upper kunar valley, you’ve kind of seen the gates of hell. and we delivered justice to bin laden. we degraded the terrorist threat of al qaeda in afghanistan. and after 20 years of value—valor and sacrifice, it’s time to bring those troops home. (applause.) look, even as we do, we will maintain an over-the-horizon capacity to suppress future threats to the homeland. and make no mistake: in 20 years, terrorists has—terrorism has metastasized. the threat has evolved way beyond afghanistan. and those of you in the intelligence committees, the foreign relations committee, the defense committees, you know well: we have to remain vigilant against the threats to the united states wherever they come from. al qaeda and isis are in yemen, syria, somalia, other places in africa, the middle east, and beyond. and we won’t ignore what our intelligence agencies have determined to be the most lethal terrorist threat to the homeland today: white supremacy is terrorism. we’re not going to ignore that either. my fellow americans, look, we have to come together to heal the soul of this nation. it was nearly a year ago, before her father’s funeral, when i spoke with gianna floyd, george floyd’s young daughter. she’s a little tyke, so i was kneeling down to talk to her so i could look her in the eye. and she looked at me and she said, “my daddy changed the world.” well, after the conviction of george floyd’s murderer, we can see how right she was if—if we have the courage to act as a congress. we’ve all seen the knee of injustice on the neck of black americans. now is our opportunity to make some real progress. the vast majority of men and women wearing the uniform and a badge serve our communities, and they serve them honorably. i know them. i know they want—(applause)—i know they want to help meet this moment as well. my fellow americans, we have to come together to rebuild trust between law enforcement and the people they serve, to root out systemic racism in our criminal justice system, and to enact police reform in george floyd’s name that passed the house already. i know republicans have their own ideas and are engaged in the very productive discussions with democrats in the senate. we need to work together to find a consensus. but let’s get it done next month, by the first anniversary of george floyd’s death. (applause.) the country supports this reform, and congress should act—should act. we have a giant opportunity to bend to the arc of the moral universe towards justice—real justice. and with the plans outlined tonight, we have a real chance to root out systemic racism that plagues america and american lives in other ways; a chance to deliver real equity—good jobs, good schools, affordable housing, clean air, clean water, being able to generate wealth and pass it down two generations because you have an access to purchase a house. real opportunities in the lives of more americans—black, white, latino, asian americans, native americans. look, i also want to thank the united states senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the covid-19 hate crimes act to protect asian americans and pacific islanders. (applause.) you acted decisively. (applause.) and you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we’ve seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. i urge the house to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which i will gladly, anxiously sign. i also hope congress can get to my desk the equality act to protect lgbtq americans. (applause.) to all transgender americans watching at home, especially young people who are so brave, i want you to know your president has your back. another thing: let’s authorize the violence against women act, which has been law for 27 years. (applause.) twenty-seven years ago, i wrote it. it’ll close the—the act that has to be authorized now will close the “boyfriend” loophole to keep guns out of the hands of abusers. the court order said, “this is an abuser. you can’t own a gun.” it’s to close that loophole that existed. you know, it’s estimated that 50 women are shot and killed by an intimate partner every month in america—50 a month. let’s pass it and save some lives. (applause.) and i need not—i need not tell anyone this, but gun violence is becoming an epidemic in america. the flag at the white house was still flying at half-mast for the 8 victims in the mass shooting in georgia when 10 more lives were taken in a mass shooting in colorado. and in the week in between those two events, 250 other americans were shot dead in the streets of america—250 shot dead. i know how hard it is to make progress on this issue. in the ’90s, we passed universal background checks, a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines that hold 100 rounds that can be fired off in seconds. we beat the nra. mass shootings and gun violence declined. check out the report in over 10 years. but in the early twe-—2000s, the law expired, and we’ve seen daily bloodshed since. i’m not saying if the law continued, we wouldn’t see bloodshed. more than two weeks ago in the rose garden, surrounded by some of the bravest people i know—the survivors and families who lost loved ones to gun violence—i laid out several of the department of justice a-—actions that are being taken to—impact on this epidemic. one of them is banning so-called “ghost guns.” these are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. the parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes and they can’t be traced. the buyers of these ghost gun kits aren’t required to pass any background check. anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and within 30 minutes have a weapon that’s lethal. but no more. and i will do everything in my power to protect the american people from this epidemic of gun violence, but it’s time for congress to act as well. (applause.) look, i don’t want to become confrontational but we need more senate republicans to join the overwhelming majority of democrat colleagues and close the loopholes requiring a background check on purchases of guns. we need a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. and don’t tell me it can’t be done. we did it before, and it worked. talk to most responsible gun owners and hunters. they’ll tell you there’s no possible justification for having 100 rounds in a weapon. what do you think—deer are wearing kevlar vests? (laughter.) they’ll tell you that there are too many people today who are able to buy a gun but shouldn’t be able to buy a gun. these kinds of reasonable reforms have overwhelming support from the american people, including many gun owners. the country supports reform and is—and congress should act. this shouldn’t be a red or blue issue. and no amendment to the constitution is absolute. you can’t yell “fire!” in a crowded theater. from the very beginning, there were certain guns, weapons, that could not be owned by americans. certain people could not own those weapons ever. we’re not changing the constitution; we’re being reasonable. i think this is not a democrat or republican issue; i think it’s an american issue. and here’s what else we can do: immigration has always been essential to america. let’s end our exhausting war over immigration. for more than 30 years, politicians have talked about immigration reform, and we’ve done nothing about it. it’s time to fix it. on day one of my presidency, i kept my commitment and sent a comprehensive immigration bill to the united states congress. if you believe we need to secure the border, pass it, because it has a lot of money for high-tech border security. if you believe in a pathway to citizenship, pass it so over 11 million undocumented folks—the vast majority are here overstaying visas. pass it. we can actually—if you actually want to solve a problem, i’ve sent a bill to take a close look at it. we have to—also have to get at the root problem of why people are fleeing, particularly to—to our southern border from guatemala, honduras, and el salvador: the violence, the corruption, the gangs, and the political instability, hunger, hurricanes, earthquakes, natural disasters. when i was president, my president—when i was vice president, the president asked me to focus on providing the help needed to address the root causes of migration. and it helped keep people in their own countries instead of being forced to leave. the plan was working, but the last administration decided it was not worth it. i’m restoring the program and asked vice president harris to lead our diplomatic effort to take care of this. i have absolute confidence she’ll get the job done. (applause.) now, look, if you don’t like my plan, let’s at least pass what we all agree on. congress needs to pass legislation this year to finally secure protection for dreamers—the young people who have only known america as their home. (applause.) and permanent protection for immigrants who are here on temporary protected status who came from countries beset by manmade and natural-made violence and disaster. (applause.) as well as a pathway to citizenship for farmworkers who put food on our tables. (applause.) look, immigrants have done so much for america during this pandemic and throughout our history. the country supports immigration reform. we should act. let’s argue over it, let’s debate it, but let’s act. (applause.) and if we truly want to restore the soul of america, we need to protect the sacred right to vote. most people—(applause). more people voted in the last presidential election than any time in american history, in the middle of the worst pandemic ever. it should be celebrated. instead, it’s being attacked. congress should pass h.r. 1 and the john lewis voting rights act and send it to my desk right away. (applause.) the country supports it. the congress should act now. (applause.) look, in closing, as we gather here tonight, the images of a violent mob assaulting this capitol, desecrating our democracy, remain vivid in all our minds. lives were put at risk—many of your lives. lives were lost. extraordinary courage was summoned. the insurrection was an existential crisis –- a test of whether our democracy could survive. and it did. but the struggle is far from over. the question of whether our democracy will long endure is both ancient and urgent, as old as our republic—still vital today. can our democracy deliver on its promise that all of us, created equal in the image of god, have a chance to lead lives of dignity, respect, and possibility? can our democracy deliver the most—to the most pressing needs of our people? can our democracy overcome the lies, anger, hate, and fears that have pulled us apart? america’s adversaries –- the autocrats of the world –- are betting we can’t. and i promise you, they’re betting we can’t. they believe we’re too full of anger and division and rage. they look at the images of the mob that assaulted the capitol as proof that the sun is setting on american democracy. but they are wrong. you know it; i know it. but we have to prove them wrong. we have to prove democracy still works—that our government still works and we can deliver for our people. in our first 100 days together, we have acted to restore the people’s faith in democracy to deliver. we’re vaccinating the nation. we’re creating hundreds of thousands of new jobs. we’re delivering real results to people; they can see it and feel it in their own lives. opening doors of opportunity, guaranteeing some more fairness and justice—that’s the essence of america. that’s democracy in action. our constitution opens with the words—as trite as it sounds—“we the people”. well, it’s time to remember that “we the people” are the government—you and i. not some force in a distant capital. not some powerful force that we have no control over. it’s us. it’s “we the people.” in another era when our democracy was tested, franklin roosevelt reminded us, “in america, we do our part.” we all do our part. that’s all i’m asking: that we do our part, all of us. if we do that, we will meet the center challenge of the age by proving that democracy is durable and strong. autocrats will not win the future. we will. america will. and the future belongs to america. as i stand here tonight before you, in a new and vital hour of life and democracy of our nation, and i can say with absolute confidence: i have never been more confident or optimistic about america—not because i’m president, because what’s happening with the american people. we have stared into the abyss of insurrection and autocracy, pandemic and pain, and “we the people” did not flinch. at the very moment our adversaries were certain we would pull apart and fail, we came together. we united. with light and hope, we summoned a new strength, new resolve to position us to win the competition of the 21st century, on our way to a union more perfect, more prosperous, and more just, as one people, one nation, and one america. folks, as i told every world leader i’ve ever met with over the years, it’s never ever, ever been a good bet to bet against america, and it still isn’t. (applause.) we are the united states of america. (applause.) there is not a single thing—nothing—nothing beyond our capacity. we can do whatever we set our mind to do if we do it together. (applause.) so let’s begin to get together. (applause.) god bless you all, and may god protect our troops. thank you for your patience. (applause.) Transcript
Mr. Speaker. Madam Vice President. Our First Lady and Second Gentleman.
Members of Congress and the Cabinet. Leaders of our military.
Mr. Chief Justice, Associate Justices, and retired Justices of the Supreme Court.
And you, my fellow Americans.
I start tonight by congratulating the members of the 118th Congress and the new Speaker of the House, Kevin McCarthy.
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working together.
I also want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats and the first Black House Minority Leader in history, Hakeem Jeffries.
Congratulations to the longest serving Senate Leader in history, Mitch McConnell.
And congratulations to Chuck Schumer for another term as Senate Majority Leader, this time with an even bigger majority.
And I want to give special recognition to someone who I think will be considered the greatest Speaker in the history of this country, Nancy Pelosi.
The story of America is a story of progress and resilience. Of always moving forward. Of never giving up.
A story that is unique among all nations.
We are the only country that has emerged from every crisis stronger than when we entered it.
That is what we are doing again.
Two years ago, our economy was reeling.
As I stand here tonight, we have created a record 12 million new jobs, more jobs created in two years than any president has ever created in four years.
Two years ago, COVID had shut down our businesses, closed our schools, and robbed us of so much.
Today, COVID no longer controls our lives.
And two years ago, our democracy faced its greatest threat since the Civil War.
Today, though bruised, our democracy remains unbowed and unbroken.
As we gather here tonight, we are writing the next chapter in the great American story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders ask me to define America, I define our country in one word: Possibilities.
You know, we’re often told that Democrats and Republicans can’t work together.
But over these past two years, we proved the cynics and the naysayers wrong.
Yes, we disagreed plenty. And yes, there were times when Democrats had to go it alone.
But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together.
Came together to defend a stronger and safer Europe.
Came together to pass a once-in-a-generation infrastructure law, building bridges to connect our nation and people.
Came together to pass one of the most significant laws ever, helping veterans exposed to toxic burn pits.
In fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan laws since becoming President. From reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act, to the Electoral Count Reform Act, to the Respect for Marriage Act that protects the right to marry the person you love.
To my Republican friends, if we could work together in the last Congress, there is no reason we can’t work together in this new Congress.
The people sent us a clear message. Fighting for the sake of fighting, power for the sake of power, conflict for the sake of conflict, gets us nowhere.
And that’s always been my vision for our country. To restore the soul of the nation. To rebuild the backbone of America, the middle class. To unite the country.
We’ve been sent here to finish the job.
For decades, the middle class was hollowed out.
Too many good-paying manufacturing jobs moved overseas. Factories at home closed down.
Once-thriving cities and towns became shadows of what they used to be.
And along the way, something else was lost.
Pride. That sense of self-worth.
I ran for President to fundamentally change things, to make sure the economy works for everyone so we can all feel pride in what we do.
To build an economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. Because when the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well.
As my Dad used to say, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, “Honey—it’s going to be OK,” and mean it.
So, let’s look at the results. Unemployment rate at 3.4%, a 50-year low. Near record low unemployment for Black and Hispanic workers.
We’ve already created 800,000 good-paying manufacturing jobs, the fastest growth in 40 years.
Where is it written that America can’t lead the world in manufacturing again?
For too many decades, we imported products and exported jobs.
Now, thanks to all we’ve done, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs.
Inflation has been a global problem because of the pandemic that disrupted supply chains and Putin’s war that disrupted energy and food supplies.
But we’re better positioned than any country on Earth.
We have more to do, but here at home, inflation is coming down.
Here at home, gas prices are down $1.50 a gallon since their peak.
Food inflation is coming down.
Inflation has fallen every month for the last six months while take home pay has gone up.
Additionally, over the last two years, a record 10 million Americans applied to start a new small business.
Every time somebody starts a small business, it’s an act of hope.
And the Vice President will continue her work to ensure more small businesses can access capital and the historic laws we enacted.
Standing here last year, I shared with you a story of American genius and possibility.
Semiconductors, the small computer chips the size of your fingertip that power everything from cellphones to automobiles, and so much more. These chips were invented right here in America.
America used to make nearly 40% of the world’s chips.
But in the last few decades, we lost our edge and we’re down to producing only 10%. We all saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories overseas shut down.
Today’s automobiles need up to 3,000 chips each, but American automakers couldn’t make enough cars because there weren’t enough chips.
Car prices went up. So did everything from refrigerators to cellphones.
We can never let that happen again.
That’s why we came together to pass the bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act.
We’re making sure the supply chain for America begins in America.
We’ve already created 800,000 manufacturing jobs even without this law.
With this new law, we will create hundreds of thousands of new jobs across the country.
That’s going to come from companies that have announced more than $300 billion in investments in American manufacturing in the last two years.
Outside of Columbus, Ohio, Intel is building semiconductor factories on a thousand acres – a literal field of dreams.
That’ll create 10,000 jobs. 7,000 construction jobs. 3,000 jobs once the factories are finished.
Jobs paying $130,000 a year, and many don’t require a college degree.
Jobs where people don’t have to leave home in search of opportunity.
And it’s just getting started.
Think about the new homes, new small businesses, and so much more that will come to life.
Talk to mayors and Governors, Democrats and Republicans, and they’ll tell you what this means to their communities.
We’re seeing these fields of dreams transform the heartland.
But to maintain the strongest economy in the world, we also need the best infrastructure in the world.
We used to be #1 in the world in infrastructure, then we fell to #13th.
Now we’re coming back because we came together to pass the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the largest investment in infrastructure since President Eisenhower’s Interstate Highway System.
Already, we’ve funded over 20,000 projects, including at major airports from Boston to Atlanta to Portland.
These projects will put hundreds of thousands of people to work rebuilding our highways, bridges, railroads, tunnels, ports and airports, clean water, and high-speed internet across America.
Urban. Suburban. Rural. Tribal.
And we’re just getting started. I sincerely thank my Republican friends who voted for the law.
And to my Republican friends who voted against it but still ask to fund projects in their districts, don’t worry.
I promised to be the president for all Americans.
We’ll fund your projects. And I’ll see you at the ground-breaking.
This law will help further unite all of America.
Major projects like the Brent Spence bridge between Kentucky and Ohio over the Ohio River. Built 60 years ago. Badly in need of repairs.
One of the nation’s most congested freight routes carrying $2 billion worth of freight every day. Folks have been talking about fixing it for decades, but we’re finally going to get it done.
I went there last month with Democrats and Republicans from both states to deliver $1.6 billion for this project.
While I was there, I met an ironworker named Sara, who is here tonight.
For 30 years, she’s been a proud member of Ironworkers Local 44, known as the “cowboys of the sky” who built the Cincinnati skyline.
Sara said she can’t wait to be ten stories above the Ohio River building that new bridge. That’s pride.
That’s what we’re also building—Pride.
We’re also replacing poisonous lead pipes that go into 10 million homes and 400,000 schools and childcare centers, so every child in America can drink clean water.
We’re making sure that every community has access to affordable, high-speed internet.
No parent should have to drive to a McDonald’s parking lot so their kid can do their homework online.
And when we do these projects, we’re going to Buy American.
Buy American has been the law of the land since 1933. But for too long, past administrations have found ways to get around it.
Not anymore.
Tonight, I’m also announcing new standards to require all construction materials used in federal infrastructure projects to be made in America.
American-made lumber, glass, drywall, fiber optic cables.
And on my watch, American roads, American bridges, and American highways will be made with American products.
My economic plan is about investing in places and people that have been forgotten. Amid the economic upheaval of the past four decades, too many people have been left behind or treated like they’re invisible.
Maybe that’s you, watching at home.
You remember the jobs that went away. And you wonder whether a path even exists anymore for you and your children to get ahead without moving away.
I get it.
That’s why we’re building an economy where no one is left behind.
Jobs are coming back, pride is coming back, because of the choices we made in the last two years. This is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America and make a real difference in your lives.
For example, too many of you lay in bed at night staring at the ceiling, wondering what will happen if your spouse gets cancer, your child gets sick, or if something happens to you.
Will you have the money to pay your medical bills? Will you have to sell the house?
I get it. With the Inflation Reduction Act that I signed into law, we’re taking on powerful interests to bring your health care costs down so you can sleep better at night.
You know, we pay more for prescription drugs than any major country on Earth.
For example, one in ten Americans has diabetes.
Every day, millions need insulin to control their diabetes so they can stay alive. Insulin has been around for 100 years. It costs drug companies just $10 a vial to make.
But, Big Pharma has been unfairly charging people hundreds of dollars—and making record profits.
Not anymore.
We capped the cost of insulin at $35 a month for seniors on Medicare.
But there are millions of other Americans who are not on Medicare, including 200,000 young people with Type I diabetes who need insulin to save their lives.
Let’s finish the job this time.
Let’s cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month for every American who needs it.
This law also caps out-of-pocket drug costs for seniors on Medicare at a maximum $2,000 per year when there are in fact many drugs, like expensive cancer drugs, that can cost up to $10,000, $12,000, and $14,000 a year.
If drug prices rise faster than inflation, drug companies will have to pay Medicare back the difference.
And we’re finally giving Medicare the power to negotiate drug prices. Bringing down prescription drug costs doesn’t just save seniors money.
It will cut the federal deficit, saving tax payers hundreds of billions of dollars on the prescription drugs the government buys for Medicare.
Why wouldn’t we want to do that?
Now, some members here are threatening to repeal the Inflation Reduction Act.
Make no mistake, if you try to do anything to raise the cost of prescription drugs, I will veto it.
I’m pleased to say that more Americans have health insurance now than ever in history.
A record 16 million people are enrolled under the Affordable Care Act.
Thanks to the law I signed last year, millions are saving $800 a year on their premiums.
But the way that law was written, that benefit expires after 2025.
Let’s finish the job, make those savings permanent, and expand coverage to those left off Medicaid.
Look, the Inflation Reduction Act is also the most significant investment ever to tackle the climate crisis.
Lowering utility bills, creating American jobs, and leading the world to a clean energy future.
I’ve visited the devastating aftermaths of record floods and droughts, storms, and wildfires.
In addition to emergency recovery from Puerto Rico to Florida to Idaho, we are rebuilding for the long term.
New electric grids able to weather the next major storm.
Roads and water systems to withstand the next big flood.
Clean energy to cut pollution and create jobs in communities too often left behind.
We’re building 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations installed across the country by tens of thousands of IBEW workers.
And helping families save more than $1,000 a year with tax credits for the purchase of electric vehicles and energy-efficient appliances.
Historic conservation efforts to be responsible stewards of our lands.
Let’s face reality.
The climate crisis doesn’t care if your state is red or blue. It is an existential threat.
We have an obligation to our children and grandchildren to confront it. I’m proud of how America is at last stepping up to the challenge.
But there’s so much more to do.
We will finish the job.
And we pay for these investments in our future by finally making the wealthiest and the biggest corporations begin to pay their fair share.
I’m a capitalist. But just pay your fair share.
And I think a lot of you at home agree with me that our present tax system is simply unfair.
The idea that in 2020, 55 of the biggest companies in America made $40 billion in profits and paid zero in federal income taxes?
That’s simply not fair.
But now, because of the law I signed, billion-dollar companies have to pay a minimum of 15%.
Just 15%.
That’s less than a nurse pays. Let me be clear.
Under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in taxes.
Nobody. Not one penny.
But there’s more to do.
Let’s finish the job. Reward work, not just wealth. Pass my proposal for a billionaire minimum tax.
Because no billionaire should pay a lower tax rate than a school teacher or a firefighter.
You may have noticed that Big Oil just reported record profits.
Last year, they made $200 billion in the midst of a global energy crisis.
It’s outrageous.
They invested too little of that profit to increase domestic production and keep gas prices down.
Instead, they used those record profits to buy back their own stock, rewarding their CEOs and shareholders.
Corporations ought to do the right thing.
That’s why I propose that we quadruple the tax on corporate stock buybacks to encourage long term investments instead.
They will still make a considerable profit.
Let’s finish the job and close the loopholes that allow the very wealthy to avoid paying their taxes.
Instead of cutting the number of audits of wealthy tax payers, I signed a law that will reduce the deficit by $114 billion by cracking down on wealthy tax cheats.
That’s being fiscally responsible.
In the last two years, my administration cut the deficit by more than $1.7 trillion—the largest deficit reduction in American history.
Under the previous administration, America’s deficit went up four years in a row.
Because of those record deficits, no president added more to the national debt in any four years than my predecessor.
Nearly 25% of the entire national debt, a debt that took 200 years to accumulate, was added by that administration alone.
How did Congress respond to all that debt?
They lifted the debt ceiling three times without preconditions or crisis.
They paid America’s bills to prevent economic disaster for our country.
Tonight, I’m asking this Congress to follow suit.
Let us commit here tonight that the full faith and credit of the United States of America will never, ever be questioned.
Some of my Republican friends want to take the economy hostage unless I agree to their economic plans. All of you at home should know what their plans are.
Instead of making the wealthy pay their fair share, some Republicans want Medicare and Social Security to sunset every five years.
That means if Congress doesn’t vote to keep them, those programs will go away.
Other Republicans say if we don’t cut Social Security and Medicare, they’ll let America default on its debt for the first time in our history.
I won’t let that happen.
Social Security and Medicare are a lifeline for millions of seniors.
Americans have been paying into them with every single paycheck since they started working.
So tonight, let’s all agree to stand up for seniors. Stand up and show them we will not cut Social Security. We will not cut Medicare.
Those benefits belong to the American people. They earned them.
If anyone tries to cut Social Security, I will stop them. And if anyone tries to cut Medicare, I will stop them.
I will not allow them to be taken away.
Not today. Not tomorrow. Not ever.
Next month when I offer my fiscal plan, I ask my Republican friends to offer their plan.
We can sit down together and discuss both plans together.
My plan will lower the deficit by $2 trillion.
I won’t cut a single Social Security or Medicare benefit.
In fact, I will extend the Medicare Trust Fund by at least two decades.
I will not raise taxes on anyone making under $400,000 a year. And I will pay for the ideas I’ve talked about tonight by making the wealthy and big corporations begin to pay their fair share.
Look, here’s the deal. Big corporations aren’t just taking advantage of the tax code. They’re taking advantage of you, the American consumer.
Here’s my message to all of you out there: I have your back. We’re already preventing insurance companies from sending surprise medical bills, stopping 1 million surprise bills a month.
We’re protecting seniors’ lives and life savings by cracking down on nursing homes that commit fraud, endanger patient safety, or prescribe drugs they don’t need.
Millions of Americans can now save thousands of dollars because they can finally get hearing aids over-the-counter without a prescription.
Capitalism without competition is not capitalism. It is exploitation.
Last year I cracked down on foreign shipping companies that were making you pay higher prices for everyday goods coming into our country.
I signed a bipartisan bill that cut shipping costs by 90%, helping American farmers, businesses, and consumers.
Let’s finish the job.
Pass bipartisan legislation to strengthen antitrust enforcement and prevent big online platforms from giving their own products an unfair advantage.
My administration is also taking on “junk” fees, those hidden surcharges too many businesses use to make you pay more.
For example, we’re making airlines show you the full ticket price upfront and refund your money if your flight is cancelled or delayed.
We’ve reduced exorbitant bank overdraft fees, saving consumers more than $1 billion a year.
We’re cutting credit card late fees by 75%, from $30 to $8.
Junk fees may not matter to the very wealthy, but they matter to most folks in homes like the one I grew up in. They add up to hundreds of dollars a month.
They make it harder for you to pay the bills or afford that family trip.
I know how unfair it feels when a company overcharges you and gets away with it.
Not anymore.
We’ve written a bill to stop all that. It’s called the Junk Fee Prevention Act.
We’ll ban surprise “resort fees” that hotels tack on to your bill. These fees can cost you up to $90 a night at hotels that aren’t even resorts.
We’ll make cable internet and cellphone companies stop charging you up to $200 or more when you decide to switch to another provider.
We’ll cap service fees on tickets to concerts and sporting events and make companies disclose all fees upfront.
And we’ll prohibit airlines from charging up to $50 roundtrip for families just to sit together.
Baggage fees are bad enough—they can’t just treat your child like a piece of luggage.
Americans are tired of being played for suckers.
Pass the Junk Fee Prevention Act so companies stop ripping us off.
For too long, workers have been getting stiffed.
Not anymore.
We’re beginning to restore the dignity of work.
For example, 30 million workers had to sign non-compete agreements when they took a job. So a cashier at a burger place can’t cross the street to take the same job at another burger place to make a couple bucks more.
Not anymore.
We’re banning those agreements so companies have to compete for workers and pay them what they’re worth.
I’m so sick and tired of companies breaking the law by preventing workers from organizing.
Pass the PRO Act because workers have a right to form a union. And let’s guarantee all workers a living wage.
Let’s also make sure working parents can afford to raise a family with sick days, paid family and medical leave, and affordable child care that will enable millions more people to go to work.
Let’s also restore the full Child Tax Credit, which gave tens of millions of parents some breathing room and cut child poverty in half, to the lowest level in history.
And by the way, when we do all of these things, we increase productivity. We increase economic growth.
Let’s also finish the job and get more families access to affordable and quality housing.
Let’s get seniors who want to stay in their homes the care they need to do so. And give a little more breathing room to millions of family caregivers looking after their loved ones.
Pass my plan so we get seniors and people with disabilities the home care services they need and support the workers who are doing God’s work.
These plans are fully paid for and we can afford to do them.
Restoring the dignity of work also means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class.
When we made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best-educated, best-prepared nation in the world.
But the world has caught up.
Jill, who teaches full-time, has an expression: “Any nation that out-educates us will out-compete us.”
Folks, you all know 12 years is not enough to win the economic competition for the 21st Century.
If you want America to have the best-educated workforce, let’s finish the job by providing access to pre-school for 3- and 4-year-olds.
Studies show that children who go to pre-school are nearly 50% more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2- or 4-year degree, no matter their background.
Let’s give public school teachers a raise.
And we’re making progress by reducing student debt and increasing Pell Grants for working- and middle-class families.
Let’s finish the job, connect students to career opportunities starting in high school and provide two years of community college, some of the best career training in America, in addition to being a pathway to a four-year degree.
Let’s offer every American the path to a good career whether they go to college or not.
And folks, in the midst of the COVID crisis when schools were closed, let’s also recognize how far we’ve come in the fight against the pandemic itself.
While the virus is not gone, thanks to the resilience of the American people, we have broken COVID’s grip on us.
COVID deaths are down nearly 90%.
We’ve saved millions of lives and opened our country back up.
And soon we’ll end the public health emergency.
But we will remember the toll and pain that will never go away for so many. More than 1 million Americans have lost their lives to COVID.
Families grieving. Children orphaned. Empty chairs at the dining room table.
We remember them, and we remain vigilant.
We still need to monitor dozens of variants and support new vaccines and treatments.
So Congress needs to fund these efforts and keep America safe.
And as we emerge from this crisis stronger, I’m also doubling down on prosecuting criminals who stole relief money meant to keep workers and small businesses afloat during the pandemic.
Before I came to office many inspector generals who protect taxpayer dollars were sidelined. Fraud was rampant.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then, we’ve recovered billions of taxpayer dollars.
Now, let’s triple our anti-fraud strike forces going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars from the American people.
For every dollar we put into fighting fraud, taxpayers get back at least ten times as much.
COVID left other scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic.
We have an obligation to make sure all our people are safe.
Public safety depends on public trust. But too often that trust is violated.
Joining us tonight are the parents of Tyre Nichols, who had to bury him just last week. There are no words to describe the heartbreak and grief of losing a child.
But imagine what it’s like to lose a child at the hands of the law.
Imagine having to worry whether your son or daughter will come home from walking down the street or playing in the park or just driving their car.
I’ve never had to have the talk with my children—Beau, Hunter, and Ashley—that so many Black and Brown families have had with their children.
If a police officer pulls you over, turn on your interior lights. Don’t reach for your license. Keep your hands on the steering wheel.
Imagine having to worry like that every day in America.
Here’s what Tyre’s mom shared with me when I asked her how she finds the courage to carry on and speak out.
With faith in God, she said her son “was a beautiful soul and something good will come from this.”
Imagine how much courage and character that takes.
It’s up to us. It’s up to all of us.
We all want the same thing.
Neighborhoods free of violence.
Law enforcement who earn the community’s trust.
Our children to come home safely.
Equal protection under the law; that’s the covenant we have with each other in America.
And we know police officers put their lives on the line every day, and we ask them to do too much.
To be counselors, social workers, psychologists; responding to drug overdoses, mental health crises, and more.
We ask too much of them.
I know most cops are good, decent people. They risk their lives every time they put on that shield.
But what happened to Tyre in Memphis happens too often.
We have to do better.
Give law enforcement the training they need, hold them to higher standards, and help them succeed in keeping everyone safe.
We also need more first responders and other professionals to address growing mental health and substance abuse challenges.
More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime; more community intervention programs; more investments in housing, education, and job training.
All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
And when police officers or departments violate the public’s trust, we must hold them accountable.
With the support of families of victims, civil rights groups, and law enforcement, I signed an executive order for all federal officers banning chokeholds, restricting no-knock warrants, and other key elements of the George Floyd Act.
Let’s commit ourselves to make the words of Tyre’s mother come true, something good must come from this.
All of us in this chamber, we need to rise to this moment.
We can’t turn away.
Let’s do what we know in our hearts we need to do.
Let’s come together and finish the job on police reform.
Do something.
That was the same plea of parents who lost their children in Uvalde: Do something on gun violence.
Thank God we did, passing the most sweeping gun safety law in three decades.
That includes things that the majority of responsible gun owners support, like enhanced background checks for 18 to 21-year-olds and red flag laws keeping guns out of the hands of people who are a danger to themselves and others.
But we know our work is not done.
Joining us tonight is Brandon Tsay, a 26-year-old hero.
Brandon put off his college dreams to stay by his mom’s side as she was dying from cancer. He now works at a dance studio started by his grandparents.
Two weeks ago, during Lunar New Year celebrations, he heard the studio’s front door close and saw a man pointing a gun at him.
He thought he was going to die, but then he thought about the people inside.
In that instant, he found the courage to act and wrestled the semi-automatic pistol away from a gunman who had already killed 11 people at another dance studio.
He saved lives. It’s time we do the same as well.
Ban assault weapons once and for all.
We did it before. I led the fight to ban them in 1994.
In the 10 years the ban was law, mass shootings went down. After Republicans let it expire, mass shootings tripled.
Let’s finish the job and ban assault weapons again.
And let’s also come together on immigration and make it a bipartisan issue like it was before.
We now have a record number of personnel working to secure the border, arresting 8,000 human smugglers and seizing over 23,000 pounds of fentanyl in just the last several months.
Since we launched our new border plan last month, unlawful migration from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela has come down 97%.
But America’s border problems won’t be fixed until Congress acts.
If you won’t pass my comprehensive immigration reform, at least pass my plan to provide the equipment and officers to secure the border. And a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers, those on temporary status, farm workers, and essential workers.
Here in the people’s House, it’s our duty to protect all the people’s rights and freedoms.
Congress must restore the right the Supreme Court took away last year and codify Roe v. Wade to protect every woman’s constitutional right to choose.
The Vice President and I are doing everything we can to protect access to reproductive health care and safeguard patient privacy. But already, more than a dozen states are enforcing extreme abortion bans.
Make no mistake; if Congress passes a national abortion ban, I will veto it.
Let’s also pass the bipartisan Equality Act to ensure LGBTQ Americans, especially transgender young people, can live with safety and dignity.
Our strength is not just the example of our power, but the power of our example. Let’s remember the world is watching.
I spoke from this chamber one year ago, just days after Vladimir Putin unleashed his brutal war against Ukraine.
A murderous assault, evoking images of the death and destruction Europe suffered in World War II.
Putin’s invasion has been a test for the ages. A test for America. A test for the world.
Would we stand for the most basic of principles?
Would we stand for sovereignty?
Would we stand for the right of people to live free from tyranny?
Would we stand for the defense of democracy?
For such a defense matters to us because it keeps the peace and prevents open season for would-be aggressors to threaten our security and prosperity. One year later, we know the answer.
Yes, we would.
And yes, we did.
Together, we did what America always does at our best.
We led.
We united NATO and built a global coalition.
We stood against Putin’s aggression.
We stood with the Ukrainian people.
Tonight, we are once again joined by Ukraine’s Ambassador to the United States. She represents not just her nation, but the courage of her people.
Ambassador, America is united in our support for your country. We will stand with you as long as it takes.
Our nation is working for more freedom, more dignity, and more peace, not just in Europe, but everywhere.
Before I came to office, the story was about how the People’s Republic of China was increasing its power and America was falling in the world.
Not anymore.
I’ve made clear with President Xi that we seek competition, not conflict.
I will make no apologies that we are investing to make America strong. Investing in American innovation, in industries that will define the future, and that China’s government is intent on dominating.
Investing in our alliances and working with our allies to protect our advanced technologies so they’re not used against us.
Modernizing our military to safeguard stability and deter aggression.
Today, we’re in the strongest position in decades to compete with China or anyone else in the world.
I am committed to work with China where it can advance American interests and benefit the world.
But make no mistake: as we made clear last week, if China’s threatens our sovereignty, we will act to protect our country. And we did.
And let’s be clear: winning the competition with China should unite all of us. We face serious challenges across the world.
But in the past two years, democracies have become stronger, not weaker.
Autocracies have grown weaker, not stronger.
America is rallying the world again to meet those challenges, from climate and global health, to food insecurity, to terrorism and territorial aggression.
Allies are stepping up, spending more and doing more.
And bridges are forming between partners in the Pacific and those in the Atlantic. And those who bet against America are learning just how wrong they are.
It’s never a good bet to bet against America.
When I came to office, most everyone assumed bipartisanship was impossible. But I never believed it.
That’s why a year ago, I offered a Unity Agenda for the nation.
We’ve made real progress.
Together, we passed a law making it easier for doctors to prescribe effective treatments for opioid addiction.
Passed a gun safety law making historic investments in mental health.
Launched ARPA-H to drive breakthroughs in the fight against cancer, Alzheimer’s, diabetes, and so much more.
We passed the Heath Robinson PACT Act, named for the late Iraq war veteran whose story about exposure to toxic burn pits I shared here last year.
But there is so much more to do. And we can do it together.
Joining us tonight is a father named Doug from Newton, New Hampshire.
He wrote Jill and me a letter about his daughter Courtney. Contagious laugh. Her sister’s best friend.
He shared a story all too familiar to millions of Americans.
Courtney discovered pills in high school. It spiraled into addiction and eventually her death from a fentanyl overdose.
She was 20 years old.
Describing the last eight years without her, Doug said, “There is no worse pain.”
Yet their family has turned pain into purpose, working to end stigma and change laws.
He told us he wants to “start the journey towards America’s recovery.”
Doug, we’re with you.
Fentanyl is killing more than 70,000 Americans a year.
Let’s launch a major surge to stop fentanyl production, sale, and trafficking, with more drug detection machines to inspect cargo and stop pills and powder at the border.
Working with couriers like Fed Ex to inspect more packages for drugs. Strong penalties to crack down on fentanyl trafficking.
Second, let’s do more on mental health, especially for our children. When millions of young people are struggling with bullying, violence, trauma, we owe them greater access to mental health care at school.
We must finally hold social media companies accountable for the experiment they are running on our children for profit.
And it’s time to pass bipartisan legislation to stop Big Tech from collecting personal data on kids and teenagers online, ban targeted advertising to children, and impose stricter limits on the personal data these companies collect on all of us.
Third, let’s do more to keep our nation’s one truly sacred obligation: to equip those we send into harm’s way and care for them and their families when they come home.
Job training and job placement for veterans and their spouses as they return to civilian life.
Helping veterans afford their rent because no one should be homeless in this country, especially not those who served it.
And we cannot go on losing 17 veterans a day to the silent scourge of suicide.
The VA is doing everything it can, including expanding mental health screenings and a proven program that recruits veterans to help other veterans understand what they’re going through and get the help they need.
And fourth, last year Jill and I re-ignited the Cancer Moonshot that President Obama asked me to lead in our Administration.
Our goal is to cut the cancer death rate by at least 50% over the next 25 years. Turn more cancers from death sentences into treatable diseases. And provide more support for patients and families.
It’s personal for so many of us.
Joining us are Maurice and Kandice, an Irishman and a daughter of immigrants from Panama.
They met and fell in love in New York City and got married in the same chapel as Jill and I did.
Kindred spirits.
He wrote us a letter about their little daughter Ava.
She was just a year old when she was diagnosed with a rare kidney cancer.
26 blood transfusions. 11 rounds of radiation. 8 rounds of chemo. 1 kidney removed.
A 5% survival rate.
He wrote how in the darkest moments he thought, “if she goes, I can’t stay.”
Jill and I understand, like so many of you.
They read how Jill described our family’s cancer journey and how we tried to steal moments of joy where you can.
For them, that glimmer of joy was a half-smile from their baby girl. It meant everything.
They never gave up hope.
Ava never gave up hope. She turns four next month.
They just found out that Ava beat the odds and is on her way to being cancer free, and she’s watching from the White House tonight.
For the lives we can save and for the lives we have lost, let this be a truly American moment that rallies the country and the world together and proves that we can do big things.
Twenty years ago, under the leadership of President Bush and countless advocates and champions, we undertook a bipartisan effort through PEPFAR to transform the global fight against HIV/AIDS. It’s been a huge success.
I believe we can do the same with cancer.
Let’s end cancer as we know it and cure some cancers once and for all.
There’s one reason why we’re able to do all of these things: our democracy itself.
It’s the most fundamental thing of all.
With democracy, everything is possible. Without it, nothing is.
For the last few years our democracy has been threatened, attacked, and put at risk.
Put to the test here, in this very room, on January 6th.
And then, just a few months ago, unhinged by the Big Lie, an assailant unleashed political violence in the home of the then-Speaker of this House of Representatives. Using the very same language that insurrectionists who stalked these halls chanted on January 6th.
Here tonight in this chamber is the man who bears the scars of that brutal attack, but is as tough and strong and as resilient as they get.
My friend, Paul Pelosi.
But such a heinous act never should have happened.
We must all speak out. There is no place for political violence in America. In America, we must protect the right to vote, not suppress that fundamental right. We honor the results of our elections, not subvert the will of the people. We must uphold the rule of the law and restore trust in our institutions of democracy.
And we must give hate and extremism in any form no safe harbor.
Democracy must not be a partisan issue. It must be an American issue.
Every generation of Americans has faced a moment where they have been called on to protect our democracy, to defend it, to stand up for it.
And this is our moment.
My fellow Americans, we meet tonight at an inflection point. One of those moments that only a few generations ever face, where the decisions we make now will decide the course of this nation and of the world for decades to come.
We are not bystanders to history. We are not powerless before the forces that confront us. It is within our power, of We the People. We are facing the test of our time and the time for choosing is at hand.
We must be the nation we have always been at our best. Optimistic. Hopeful. Forward-looking.
A nation that embraces, light over darkness, hope over fear, unity over division. Stability over chaos.
We must see each other not as enemies, but as fellow Americans. We are a good people, the only nation in the world built on an idea.
That all of us, every one of us, is created equal in the image of God. A nation that stands as a beacon to the world. A nation in a new age of possibilities.
So I have come here to fulfil my constitutional duty to report on the state of the union. And here is my report.
Because the soul of this nation is strong, because the backbone of this nation is strong, because the people of this nation are strong, the State of the Union is strong.
As I stand here tonight, I have never been more optimistic about the future of America. We just have to remember who we are.
We are the United States of America and there is nothing, nothing beyond our capacity if we do it together.
May God bless you all. May God protect our troops.


View Transcriptthank you. thank you very much, everybody. wow. thank you very, very much.vice president vance, speaker johnson, senator thune, chief justice roberts, justices of the supreme court of the united states, president clinton, president bush, president obama, president biden, vice president harris, and my fellow citizens, the golden age of america begins right now.from this day forward, our country will flourish and be respected again all over the world. we will be the envy of every nation, and we will not allow ourselves to be taken advantage of any longer. during every single day of the trump administration, i will, very simply, put america first.our sovereignty will be reclaimed. our safety will be restored. the scales of justice will be rebalanced. the vicious, violent, and unfair weaponization of the justice department and our government will end.and our top priority will be to create a nation that is proud, prosperous, and free.america will soon be greater, stronger, and far more exceptional than ever before.i return to the presidency confident and optimistic that we are at the start of a thrilling new era of national success. a tide of change is sweeping the country, sunlight is pouring over the entire world, and america has the chance to seize this opportunity like never before.but first, we must be honest about the challenges we face. while they are plentiful, they will be annihilated by this great momentum that the world is now witnessing in the united states of america.as we gather today, our government confronts a crisis of trust. for many years, a radical and corrupt establishment has extracted power and wealth from our citizens while the pillars of our society lay broken and seemingly in complete disrepair.we now have a government that cannot manage even a simple crisis at home while, at the same time, stumbling into a continuing catalogue of catastrophic events abroad.it fails to protect our magnificent, law-abiding american citizens but provides sanctuary and protection for dangerous criminals, many from prisons and mental institutions, that have illegally entered our country from all over the world.we have a government that has given unlimited funding to the defense of foreign borders but refuses to defend american borders or, more importantly, its own people.our country can no longer deliver basic services in times of emergency, as recently shown by the wonderful people of north carolina—who have been treated so badly—and other states who are still suffering from a hurricane that took place many months ago or, more recently, los angeles, where we are watching fires still tragically burn from weeks ago without even a token of defense. they’re raging through the houses and communities, even affecting some of the wealthiest and most powerful individuals in our country—some of whom are sitting here right now. they don’t have a home any longer. that’s interesting. but we can’t let this happen. everyone is unable to do anything about it. that’s going to change.we have a public health system that does not deliver in times of disaster, yet more money is spent on it than any country anywhere in the world.and we have an education system that teaches our children to be ashamed of themselves—in many cases, to hate our country despite the love that we try so desperately to provide to them. all of this will change starting today, and it will change very quickly.my recent election is a mandate to completely and totally reverse a horrible betrayal and all of these many betrayals that have taken place and to give the people back their faith, their wealth, their democracy, and, indeed, their freedom. from this moment on, america’s decline is over.our liberties and our nation’s glorious destiny will no longer be denied. and we will immediately restore the integrity, competency, and loyalty of america’s government.over the past eight years, i have been tested and challenged more than any president in our 250-year history, and i’ve learned a lot along the way.the journey to reclaim our republic has not been an easy one—that, i can tell you. those who wish to stop our cause have tried to take my freedom and, indeed, to take my life.just a few months ago, in a beautiful pennsylvania field, an assassin’s bullet ripped through my ear. but i felt then and believe even more so now that my life was saved for a reason. i was saved by god to make america great again.thank you. thank you.thank you very much.that is why each day under our administration of american patriots, we will be working to meet every crisis with dignity and power and strength. we will move with purpose and speed to bring back hope, prosperity, safety, and peace for citizens of every race, religion, color, and creed.for american citizens, january 20th, 2025, is liberation day. it is my hope that our recent presidential election will be remembered as the greatest and most consequential election in the history of our country.as our victory showed, the entire nation is rapidly unifying behind our agenda with dramatic increases in support from virtually every element of our society: young and old, men and women, african americans, hispanic americans, asian americans, urban, suburban, rural. and very importantly, we had a powerful win in all seven swing states and the popular vote, we won by millions of people.to the black and hispanic communities, i want to thank you for the tremendous outpouring of love and trust that you have shown me with your vote. we set records, and i will not forget it. i’ve heard your voices in the campaign, and i look forward to working with you in the years to come.today is martin luther king day. and his honor—this will be a great honor. but in his honor, we will strive together to make his dream a reality. we will make his dream come true.thank you. thank you. thank you.national unity is now returning to america, and confidence and pride is soaring like never before. in everything we do, my administration will be inspired by a strong pursuit of excellence and unrelenting success. we will not forget our country, we will not forget our constitution, and we will not forget our god. can’t do that.today, i will sign a series of historic executive orders. with these actions, we will begin the complete restoration of america and the revolution of common sense. it’s all about common sense.first, i will declare a national emergency at our southern border.all illegal entry will immediately be halted, and we will begin the process of returning millions and millions of criminal aliens back to the places from which they came. we will reinstate my remain in mexico policy.i will end the practice of catch and release.and i will send troops to the southern border to repel the disastrous invasion of our country.under the orders i sign today, we will also be designating the cartels as foreign terrorist organizations.and by invoking the alien enemies act of 1798, i will direct our government to use the full and immense power of federal and state law enforcement to eliminate the presence of all foreign gangs and criminal networks bringing devastating crime to us soil, including our cities and inner cities.as commander in chief, i have no higher responsibility than to defend our country from threats and invasions, and that is exactly what i am going to do. we will do it at a level that nobody has ever seen before.next, i will direct all members of my cabinet to marshal the vast powers at their disposal to defeat what was record inflation and rapidly bring down costs and prices.the inflation crisis was caused by massive overspending and escalating energy prices, and that is why today i will also declare a national energy emergency. we will drill, baby, drill.america will be a manufacturing nation once again, and we have something that no other manufacturing nation will ever have—the largest amount of oil and gas of any country on earth—and we are going to use it. we’ll use it.we will bring prices down, fill our strategic reserves up again right to the top, and export american energy all over the world.we will be a rich nation again, and it is that liquid gold under our feet that will help to do it.with my actions today, we will end the green new deal, and we will revoke the electric vehicle mandate, saving our auto industry and keeping my sacred pledge to our great american autoworkers.in other words, you’ll be able to buy the car of your choice.we will build automobiles in america again at a rate that nobody could have dreamt possible just a few years ago. and thank you to the autoworkers of our nation for your inspiring vote of confidence. we did tremendously with their vote.i will immediately begin the overhaul of our trade system to protect american workers and families. instead of taxing our citizens to enrich other countries, we will tariff and tax foreign countries to enrich our citizens.for this purpose, we are establishing the external revenue service to collect all tariffs, duties, and revenues. it will be massive amounts of money pouring into our treasury, coming from foreign sources.the american dream will soon be back and thriving like never before.to restore competence and effectiveness to our federal government, my administration will establish the brand-new department of government efficiency.after years and years of illegal and unconstitutional federal efforts to restrict free expression, i also will sign an executive order to immediately stop all government censorship and bring back free speech to america.never again will the immense power of the state be weaponized to persecute political opponents—something i know something about. we will not allow that to happen. it will not happen again.under my leadership, we will restore fair, equal, and impartial justice under the constitutional rule of law.and we are going to bring law and order back to our cities.this week, i will also end the government policy of trying to socially engineer race and gender into every aspect of public and private life. we will forge a society that is colorblind and merit-based.as of today, it will henceforth be the official policy of the united states government that there are only two genders: male and female.this week, i will reinstate any service members who were unjustly expelled from our military for objecting to the covid vaccine mandate with full back pay.and i will sign an order to stop our warriors from being subjected to radical political theories and social experiments while on duty. it’s going to end immediately. our armed forces will be freed to focus on their sole mission: defeating america’s enemies.like in 2017, we will again build the strongest military the world has ever seen. we will measure our success not only by the battles we win but also by the wars that we end—and perhaps most importantly, the wars we never get into.my proudest legacy will be that of a peacemaker and unifier. that’s what i want to be: a peacemaker and a unifier.i’m pleased to say that as of yesterday, one day before i assumed office, the hostages in the middle east are coming back home to their families.thank you.america will reclaim its rightful place as the greatest, most powerful, most respected nation on earth, inspiring the awe and admiration of the entire world.a short time from now, we are going to be changing the name of the gulf of mexico to the gulf of america, and we will restore the name of a great president, william mckinley, to mount mckinley, where it should be and where it belongs.president mckinley made our country very rich through tariffs and through talent—he was a natural businessman—and gave teddy roosevelt the money for many of the great things he did, including the panama canal, which has foolishly been given to the country of panama after the united spates—the united states, i mean, think of this—spent more money than ever spent on a project before and lost 38,000 lives in the building of the panama canal.we have been treated very badly from this foolish gift that should have never been made, and panama’s promise to us has been broken.the purpose of our deal and the spirit of our treaty has been totally violated. american ships are being severely overcharged and not treated fairly in any way, shape, or form. and that includes the united states navy.and above all, china is operating the panama canal. and we didn’t give it to china. we gave it to panama, and we’re taking it back.above all, my message to americans today is that it is time for us to once again act with courage, vigor, and the vitality of history’s greatest civilization.so, as we liberate our nation, we will lead it to new heights of victory and success. we will not be deterred. together, we will end the chronic disease epidemic and keep our children safe, healthy, and disease-free.the united states will once again consider itself a growing nation—one that increases our wealth, expands our territory, builds our cities, raises our expectations, and carries our flag into new and beautiful horizons.and we will pursue our manifest destiny into the stars, launching american astronauts to plant the stars and stripes on the planet mars.ambition is the lifeblood of a great nation, and, right now, our nation is more ambitious than any other. there’s no nation like our nation.americans are explorers, builders, innovators, entrepreneurs, and pioneers. the spirit of the frontier is written into our hearts. the call of the next great adventure resounds from within our souls.our american ancestors turned a small group of colonies on the edge of a vast continent into a mighty republic of the most extraordinary citizens on earth. no one comes close.americans pushed thousands of miles through a rugged land of untamed wilderness. they crossed deserts, scaled mountains, braved untold dangers, won the wild west, ended slavery, rescued millions from tyranny, lifted billions from poverty, harnessed electricity, split the atom, launched mankind into the heavens, and put the universe of human knowledge into the palm of the human hand. if we work together, there is nothing we cannot do and no dream we cannot achieve.many people thought it was impossible for me to stage such a historic political comeback. but as you see today, here i am. the american people have spoken.i stand before you now as proof that you should never believe that something is impossible to do. in america, the impossible is what we do best.from new york to los angeles, from philadelphia to phoenix, from chicago to miami, from houston to right here in washington, dc, our country was forged and built by the generations of patriots who gave everything they had for our rights and for our freedom.they were farmers and soldiers, cowboys and factory workers, steelworkers and coal miners, police officers and pioneers who pushed onward, marched forward, and let no obstacle defeat their spirit or their pride.together, they laid down the railroads, raised up the skyscrapers, built great highways, won two world wars, defeated fascism and communism, and triumphed over every single challenge that they faced.after all we have been through together, we stand on the verge of the four greatest years in american history. with your help, we will restore america promise and we will rebuild the nation that we love—and we love it so much.we are one people, one family, and one glorious nation under god. so, to every parent who dreams for their child and every child who dreams for their future, i am with you, i will fight for you, and i will win for you. we’re going to win like never before.thank you. thank you.thank you. thank you.in recent years, our nation has suffered greatly. but we are going to bring it back and make it great again, greater than ever before.we will be a nation like no other, full of compassion, courage, and exceptionalism. our power will stop all wars and bring a new spirit of unity to a world that has been angry, violent, and totally unpredictable.america will be respected again and admired again, including by people of religion, faith, and goodwill. we will be prosperous, we will be proud, we will be strong, and we will win like never before.we will not be conquered, we will not be intimidated, we will not be broken, and we will not fail. from this day on, the united states of america will be a free, sovereign, and independent nation.we will stand bravely, we will live proudly, we will dream boldly, and nothing will stand in our way because we are americans. the future is ours, and our golden age has just begun.thank you. god bless america. thank you all. thank you. thank you very much. thank you very much. thank you. Transcript
Good evening. Good evening. If I were smart, I’d go home now.Mr. Speaker, Madam Vice President, members of Congress, my fellow Americans.In January 1941, Franklin Roosevelt came to this chamber to speak to the nation. And he said, “I address you at a moment unprecedented in the history of the Union.” Hitler was on the march. War was raging in Europe.President Roosevelt’s purpose was to wake up Congress and alert the American people that this was no ordinary time. Freedom and democracy were under assault in the world.Tonight, I come to the same chamber to address the nation. Now it’s we who face an unprecedented moment in the history of the Union.And, yes, my purpose tonight is to wake up the Congress and alert the American people that this is no ordinary moment either. Not since President Lincoln and the Civil War have freedom and democracy been under assault at home as they are today.What makes our moment rare is that freedom and democracy are under attack at — both at home and overseas at the very same time.Overseas, Putin of Russia is on the march, invading Ukraine and sowing chaos throughout Europe and beyond.If anybody in this room thinks Putin will stop at Ukraine, I assure you: He will not.But Ukraine — Ukraine can stop Putin. Ukraine can stop Putin if we stand with Ukraine and provide the weapons that it needs to defend itself.That is all — that is all Ukraine is asking. They’re not asking for American soldiers. In fact, there are no American soldiers at war in Ukraine, and I’m determined to keep it that way.But now assistance to Ukraine is being blocked by those who want to walk away from our world leadership.It wasn’t long ago when a Republican president named Ronald Reagan thundered, “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall.”Now — now my predecessor, a former Republican president, tells Putin, quote, “Do whatever the hell you want.”That’s a quote.A former president actually said that — bowing down to a Russian leader. I think it’s outrageous, it’s dangerous, and it’s unacceptable.America is a founding member of NATO, the military alliance of democratic nations created after World War Two prevent — to prevent war and keep the peace.And today, we’ve made NATO stronger than ever. We welcomed Finland to the Alliance last year. And just this morning, Sweden officially joined, and their minister is here tonight. Stand up. Welcome. Welcome, welcome, welcome. And they know how to fight.Mr. Prime Minister, welcome to NATO, the strongest military alliance the world has ever seen.I say this to Congress: We have to stand up to Putin. Send me a bipartisan national security bill. History is literally watching. History is watching.If the United States walks away, it will put Ukraine at risk. Europe is at risk. The free world will be at risk, emboldening others to do what they wish to do us harm.My message to President Putin, who I’ve known for a long time, is simple: We will not walk away. We will not bow down. I will not bow down.In a literal sense, history is watching. History is watching — just like history watched three years ago on January 6th — when insurrectionists stormed this very Capitol and placed a dagger to the throat of American democracy.Many of you were here on that darkest of days. We all saw with our own eyes the insurrectionists were not patriots. They had come to stop the peaceful transfer of power, to overturn the will of the people.January 6th lies about the 2020 election and the plots to steal the election posed a great — gravest threat to U.S. democracy since the Civil War.But they failed. America stood — America stood strong and democracy prevailed. We must be honest: The threat to democracy must be [defeated].My predecessor and some of you here seek to bury the truth about January 6th. I will not do that.This is a moment to speak the truth and to bury the lies. Here’s the simple truth: You can’t love your country only when you win.As I’ve done ever since being elected to office, I ask all of you, without regard to party, to join together and defend democracy. Remember your oath of office to defend againstall threats foreign and domestic.Respect — respect free and fair elections, restore trust in our institutions, and make clear political violence has absolutely no place — no place in America. Zero place.Again, it’s not — it’s not hyperbole to suggest history is watching. They’re watching. Your children and grandchildren will read about this day and what we do.History is watching another assault on freedom. Joining us [tonight] is Latorya Beasley, a social worker from Birmingham, Alabama.Fourteen months ago — fourteen months ago, she and her husband welcomed a baby girl thanks to the miracle of IVF. She scheduled treatments to have that second child, but the Alabama Supreme Court shut down IVF treatments across the state, unleashed by a Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade. She was told her dream would have to wait.What her family had gone through should never have happened. Unless Congress acts, it could happen again.So, tonight, let’s stand up for families like hers. To my friends across the aisle — don’t keep this waiting any longer. Guarantee the right to IVF. Guarantee it nationwide.Like most Americans, I believe Roe v. Wade got it right.I thank Vice President Harris for being an incredible leader defending reproductive freedom and so much more. Thank you.My predecessor came to office determined to see Roe v. Wade overturned. He’s the reason it was overturned, and he brags about it. Look at the chaos that has resulted.Joining us tonight is Kate Cox, a wife and mother from Dallas. She’d become pregnant again and had a fetus with a fatal condition. Her doctor told Kate that her own life and her ability to have future in the fil- — children in the future were at risk if she didn’t act. Because Texas law banned her ability to act, Kate and her husband had to leave the state to get what she needed.What her family had gone through should have never happened as well. But it’s happening to too many others.There are state laws banning the freedom to choose, criminalizing doctors, forcing survivors of rape and incest to leave their states to get the treatment they need.Many of you in this chamber and my predecessor are promising to pass a national ban on reproductive freedom.My God, what freedom else would you take away?Look, its decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court majority wrote the following — and with all due respect, Justices — “Women are not without electoral — electoral power” — excuse me — “electoral or political power.”You’re about to realize just how much you were right about that.Clearly — clearly, those bragging about overturning Roe v. Wade have no clue about the power of women.But they found out. When reproductive freedom was on the ballot, we won in 2022 and 2023. And we’ll win again in 2024.If you — if you, the American people, send me a Congress that supports the right to choose, I promise you I will restore Roe v. Wade as the law of the land again.Folks, America cannot go back.I am here to- — tonight to show what I believe is the way forward, because I know how far we’ve come.Four years ago next week, before I came to office, the country was hit by the worst pandemic and the worst economic crisis in a century.Remember the fear, record losses?Remember the spikes in crime and the murder rate? A raging virus that took more than 1 million American lives of loved ones, millions left behind.A mental health crisis of isolation and loneliness.A president, my predecessor, failed in the most basic presidential duty that he owes to American people: the duty to care.I think that’s unforgivable.I came to office determined to get us through one of the toughest periods in the nation’s history. We have.It doesn’t make new, but in a — news — in a thousand cities and towns, the American people are writing the greatest comeback story never told.So, let’s tell the story here — tell it here and now.America’s comeback is building a future of American possibilities; building an economy from the middle out and the bottom up, not the top down; investing in all of America, in all Americans to make every- — sure everyone has a fair shot and we leave no one — no one behind.The pandemic no longer controls our lives. The vaccine that saved us from COVID is — are now being used to beat cancer.Turning setback into comeback. That’s what America does. That’s what America does.Folks, I inherited an economy that was on the brink. Now, our economy is literally the envy of the world.Fifteen million new jobs in just three years. A record. A record.Unemployment at 50-year lows.A record 16 million Americans are starting small businesses, and each one is a literal act of hope, with historic job growth and small-business growth for Black and Hispanics and Asian Americans. Eight hundred thousand new manufacturing jobs in America and counting.Where is it written we can’t be the manufacturing capital of the world? We are and we will.More people have health insurance today — more people have health insurance today than ever before.The racial wealth gap is the smallest it’s been in 20 years.Wages keep going up. Inflation keeps coming down. Inflation has dropped from 9 percent to 3 percent — the lowest in the world and [trending] lower.The landing is and will be soft. And now, instead of — importing foreign products and exporting American jobs, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs — right here in America, where they belong.And it takes time, but the American people are beginning to feel it. Consumer studies show consumer confidence is soaring.“Buy America” has been the law of the land since the 1930s. Past administrations, including my predecessor — including some Democrats, as well, in the past — failed to buy American. Not anymore.On my watch, federal projects that you fund — like helping build American roads, bridges, and highways — will be made with American products and built by American workers — creating good-paying American jobs.And thanks to our CHIPS and Science Act — the United States is investing more in research and development than ever before. During the pandemic, a shortage of semiconductors, chips that drove up the price of everything from cell phones to automobiles — and, by the way, we invented those chips right here in America.Well, instead of having to import them, instead of — private companies are now investing billions of dollars to build new chip factories here in America — creating tens of thousands of jobs, many of those jobs paying $100,000 a year and don’t require a college degree.In fact, my policies have attracted $650 billion in private-sector investment in clean energy, advanced manufacturing, creating tens of thousands of jobs here in America.And thanks — and thanks to our Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, 46,000 new projects have been announced all across your communities.And, by the way, I noticed some of you who’ve strongly voted against it are there cheering on that money coming in. And I like it. I’m with you. I’m with you.And if any of you don’t want that money in your district, just let me know.Modernizing our roads and bridges, ports and airports, public transit systems. Removing poi- — poisonous lead pipes so every child can drink clean water without risk of brain damage.Providing affordable — affordable high-speed Internet for every American, no matter where you live — urban, suburban, or rural communities in red states and blue states.Record investments in Tribal communities.Because of my investment in family farms — because I invested in family farms — led by my Secretary of Agriculture, who knows more about this anybody I know — we’re better able to stay in the family for the — those farms so their — and their children and grandchildren won’t have to leave — leave home to make a living. It’s transformative.The great comeback story is Belvidere, Illinois. Home to an auto plant for nearly 60 years. Before I came to office, the plant was on its way to shutting down. Thousands of workers feared for their livelihoods. Hope was fading.Then, I was elected to office, and we raised Belvidere repeatedly with auto companies, knowing unions would make all the difference. The UAW worked like hell to keep the plant open and get these jobs back. And together, we succeeded.Instead of auto factories shutting down, auto factories are reopening and a new state-of-the-art battery factory is being built to power those cars there at the same.To the folks — to the folks of Belvidere, I’d say: Instead of your town being left behind, your community is moving forward again. Because instead of watching auto ja- — jobs of the future go overseas, 4,000 union jobs with higher wages are building a future in Belvidere right here in America.Here tonight is UAW President Shawn Fain, a great friend and a great labor leader. Shawn, where are you? Stand up.And — and Dawn — and Dawn Simms, a third-generation worker — UAW worker at Belvidere.Shawn, I was proud to be the first President to stand in the picket line. And today, Dawn has a good job in her hometown, providing stability for her family and pride and dignity as well.Showing once again Wall Street didn’t build America. They’re not bad guys. They didn’t build it, though. The middle class built the country, and unions built the middle class.I say to the American people: When America gets knocked down, we get back up. We keep going. That’s America. That’s you, the American people.It’s because of you America is coming back. It’s because of you our future is brighter. It’s because of you that tonight we can proudly say the state of our Union is strong and getting stronger.Tonight — tonight, I want to talk about the future of possibilities that we can build together — a future where the days of trickle-down economics are over and the wealthy and the biggest corporations no longer get the — all the tax breaks.And, by the way, I understand corporations. I come from a state that has more corporations invested than every one of your states in the state — the United States combined. And I represented it for 36 years. I’m not anti-corporation.But I grew up in a home where trickle-down economics didn’t put much on my dad’s kitchen table. That’s why I’m determined to turn things around so the middle class does well. When they do well, the poor have a way up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well.And there’s more to do to make sure you’re feeling the benefits of all we’re doing.Americans pay more for prescription drugs than anywhere in the world. It’s wrong, and I’m ending it.With a law that I proposed and signed — and not one of your Republican buddies work- — voted for it — we finally beat Big Pharma.Instead of paying $400 a month or thereabouts for insulin with diabetes — and it only costs 10 bucks to make — they only get paid $35 a month now and still make a healthy profit.And I want to — and what to do next, I want to cap the cost of insulin at $35 a month for every American who needs it — everyone.For years, people have talked about it. But finally, we got it done and gave Medicare the power to negotiate lower prices on prescription drugs, just like the VA is able to do for veterans.That’s not just saving seniors money. It’s saving taxpayers money. We cut the federal deficit by $160 billion — because Medicare will no longer have to pay those exorbitant prices to Big Pharma.This year, Medicare is negotiating lower prices for some of the costliest drugs on the market that treat everything from heart disease to arthritis. It’s now time to go further and give Medicare the power to negotiate lower prices for 500 different drugs over the next decade.They’re making a lot of money, guys. And they’ll still be extremely profitable. It will not only save lives; it will save taxpayers another $200 billion.Starting next year, the same law caps total prescription drug costs for seniors on Medicare at $200 — at $2,000 a year, even for expensive cancer drugs that cost $10-, $12-, $15,000. Now I want to cap prescription drug costs at $2,000 a year for everyone.Folks, I’m going to get in trouble for saying that, but any of you want to get in Air Force One with me and fly to Toronto, Berlin, Moscow — I mean, excuse me. Well, even Moscow, probably. And bring your prescription with you, and I promise you, I’ll get it for you for 40 percent the cost you’re paying now. Same company, same drug, same place.Folks, the Affordable Care Act — the old “Obamacare” — is still a very big deal.Over 100 million of you can no longer be denied health insurance because of a preexisting condition. But my predecessor and many in this chamber want to take the — that prescription drug away by repealing Affordable Care Act.I’m not going to let that happen. We stopped you 50 times before, and we’ll stop you again.In fact, I’m not only protecting it, I’m expanding it. The — we enacted tax credits of $800 per person per year [to] reduce healthcare costs for millions of working families. That tax credit expires next year. I want to make that savings permanent.To state the obvious: Women are more than half of our population, but research on women’s health has always been underfunded.That’s why we’re launching the first-ever White House Initiative on Women’s Health Research, led by Jill — doing an incredible job as First Lady — to pa- — to pass my plan for $12 billion to transform women’s health research and benefit millions of lives all across America.I know the cost of housing is so important to you. Inflation keeps coming down. Mortgage rates will come down as well, and the Fed acknowledges that.But I’m not waiting. I want to provide an annual tax credit that will give Americans $400 a month for the next two years as mortgage rates come down to put toward their mortgages when they buy their first home or trade up for a little more space. That’s for two years.And my administration is also eliminating title insurance [fees] on federally backed mortgages. When you refinance your home, you can save $1,000 or more as a consequence.For millions of renters, we’re cracking down on big landlords who use antitrust law — using antitrust — who break antitrust laws — — by price-fixing and driving up rents.We’ve cut red tape so builders can get federally financing, which is already helping build a record 1.7 million new house u- — housing units nationwide.Now pass — now pass [my plan] and build and renovate 2 million affordable homes and bring those rents down.To remain the strongest economy in the world, we need to have the best education system in the world. And I, like I suspect all of you, want to give a child — every child a good start by providing access to preschool for three- and four-years-old.You know, I think I pointed out last year — I think I pointed out last year that children coming from broken homes where there’s no books, they’re not read to, they’re not spoken to very often start school — kindergarten or first grade hearing — having heard a million fewer words spoken.Well, studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50 percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a two- and four-year degree no matter what their background is.I met a year and a half ago with the leaders of the Business Roundtable. They were mad that I was ever — angry — I — well, they were discussing — — why I wanted to spend money on education.I pointed out to them: As Vice President, I met with over 8- — I think it was 182 of those folks — don’t hold me to the exact number — and I asked them what they need most — the CEOs. And you’ve had the same experience on both sides of the aisle. They say, “A better-educated workforce,” right?So, I looked at them. And I say, “I come from Delaware. DuPont used to be the eighth-largest corporation in the world. And every new enter- — enterprise they bought, they educated the workforce to that enterprise. But none of you do that anymore. Why are you angry with me providing you the opportunity for the best-educated workforce in the world?”And they all looked at me and said, “I think you’re right.”I want to expand high-quality tutoring and summer learning to see that every child learns to read by third grade.I’m also connecting local businesses and high schools so students get hands-on experience and a path to a good-paying job whether or not they go to college.And I want to make sure that college is more affordable. Let’s continue increasing the Pell Grants to working- and middle-class families and increase record investments in HBCUs and minority-serving institutions, including Hispanic institutions.When I was told I couldn’t universally just change the way in which we did — dealt with student loans, I fixed two student loan programs that already existed to reduce the burden of student debt for nearly 4 million Americans, including nurses, firefighters — — and others in public service.Like Keenan Jones, a public educator in Minnesota, who’s here with us tonight. Keenan, where are you? Keenan, thank you.He’s educated hundreds of students so they can go to college. Now he’s able to help, after debt forgiveness, get his own daughter to college.And, folks, look, such relief is good for the economy because folks are now able to buy a home, start a business, start a family.And while we’re at it, I want to give public school teachers a raise.And, by the way, the first couple of years, we cut the deficit.Now let me speak to the question of fundamental fairness for all Americans. I’ve been delivering real results in fiscally responsible ways. We’ve already cut the federal deficit — we’ve already cut the federal deficit by over $1 trillion.I signed a bipartisan deal to cut another trillion dollars in the next decade.It’s my goal to cut the federal deficit another $3 trillion by making big corporations and the very wealthy finally beginning to pay their fair share.Look, I’m a capitalist. If you want to make or can make a million or millions of bucks, that’s great. Just pay your fair share in taxes.A fair tax code is how we invest in things that make this country great: healthcare, education, defense, and so much more.But here’s the deal. The last administration enacted a $2 trillion tax cut overwhelmingly benefit the top 1 percent — the very wealthy — and the biggest corporations — and exploded the federal deficit.They added more to the national debt than any presidential term in American history. Check the numbers.Folks at home, does anybody really think the tax code is fair?Do you really think the wealthy and big corporations need another $2 trillion tax break?I sure don’t. I’m going to keep fighting like hell to make it fair. Under my plan, nobody earning less than $400,000 a year will pay an additional penny in federal taxes — — nobody — not one penny. And they haven’t yet.In fact, the Child Tax Credit I passed during the pandemic cut taxes for millions of working families and cut child poverty in half.Restore that Child Tax Credit. No child should go hungry in this country.The way to make the tax code fair is to make big corporations and the very wealthy begin to pay their share. Remember in 2020, 55 of the biggest companies in America made $40 billion and paid zero in federal income tax. Zero.Not anymore.Thanks to the law I wrote and we signed, big companies now have to pay a minimum of 15 percent. But that’s still less than working people pay in federal taxes.It’s time to raise the corporate minimum tax to at least 21 percent — so every big corporation finally begins to pay their fair share.I also want to end tax breaks for Big Pharma, Big Oil, private jets, massive executive pay when it was only supposed to be a million bal- — a million dollars that could be deducted. They can pay them $20 million if they want, but deduct a million.End it now.You know, there are 1,000 billionaires in America. You know what the average federal tax is for those billionaires?No.They’re making great sacrifices — 8.2 percent.That’s far less than the vast majority of Americans pay.No billionaire should pay a lower federal tax rate than a teacher, a sanitation worker, or a nurse.I proposed a minimum tax for billionaires of 25 percent — just 25 percent. You know what that would raise? That would raise $500 billion over the next 10 years.And imagine what that could do for America. Imagine a future with affordable childcare, millions of families can get what they need to go to work to help grow the economy.Imagine a future with paid leave, because no one should have to choose between working and taking care of their sick family member.Imagine — imagine a future with home care and eldercare, and people living with disabilities so they can stay in their homes and family caregivers can finally get the pay they deserve.Tonight, let’s all agree once again to stand up for seniors.Many of my friends on the other side of the aisle want to put Social Security on the chopping block.If anyone here tries to cut Social Security or Medicare or raise the retirement age, I will stop you.The working people — the working people who built this country pay more into Social Security than millionaires and billionaires do. It’s not fair.We have two ways to go. Republicans can cut Social Security and give more tax breaks to the wealthy. I will —That’s the proposal. Oh, no? You guys don’t want another $2 trillion tax cut?I kind of thought that’s what your plan was. Well, that’s good to hear. You’re not going to cut another $2 trillion for the super-wealthy? That’s good to hear.I’ll protect and strengthen Social Security and make the wealthy pay their fair share.Look, too many corporations raise prices to pad their profits, charging more and more for less and less.That’s why we’re cracking down on corporations that engage in price gouging and deceptive pricing, from food to healthcare to housing.In fact, the snack companies think you won’t notice if they change the size of the bag and put a hell of a lot fewer — same — same size bag — put fewer chips in it. No, I’m not joking. It’s called “shrink-flation.”Pass Bobby Casey’s bill and stop this. I really mean it.You probably all saw that commercial on Snickers bars. And you get — you get charged the same amount, and you got about, I don’t know, 10 percent fewer Snickers in it.Look, I’m also getting rid of junk fees — those hidden fees — at the end of your bill that are there without your knowledge. My administration announced we’re cutting credit card late fees from $32 to $8.Banks and credit card companies are allowed to charge what it costs them to instigate the collection. And that’s more — a hell of a lot like $8 than 30-some dollars.But they don’t like it. The credit card companies don’t like it, but I’m saving American families $20 billion a year with all of the junk fees I’m eliminating.Folks at home, that’s why the banks are so mad. It’s $20 billion in profit.I’m not stopping there.My administration has proposed rules to make cable, travel, utilities, and online ticket sellers tell you the total price up front so there are no surprises.It matters. It matters.And so does this. In November, my team began serious negotiations with a bipartisan group of senators. The result was a bipartisan bill with the toughest set of border security reforms we’ve ever seen.Oh, you don’t think so?Oh, you don’t like that bill — huh? — that conservatives got together and said was a good bill? I’ll be darned. That’s amazing.That bipartisan bill would hire 1,500 more security agents and officers, 100 more immigration judges to help tackle the backload of 2 million cases, 4,300 more asylum officers, and new policies so they can resolve cases in six months instead of six years now. What are you against?One hundred more high-tech drug detection machines to significantly increase the ability to screen and stop vehicles smuggling fentanyl into America that’s killing thousands of children.This bill would save lives and bring order to the border.It would also give me and any new president new emergency authority to temporarily shut down the border when the number of migrants at the border is overwhelming.The Border Patrol union has endorsed this bill.The federal Chamber of Commerce has — yeah, yeah. You’re saying “no.” Look at the facts. I know — I know you know how to read.I believe that given the opportunity — for — a majority in the House and Senate would endorse the bill as well — a majority right now.But unfortunately, politics have derailed this bill so far.I’m told my predecessor called members of Congress in the Senate to demand they block the bill. He feels political win — he viewed it as a — it would be a political win for me and a political loser for him. It’s not about him. It’s not about me. I’d be a winner — not really. I —(The President holds up a pin reading “Say Her Name, Laken Riley.”) Lanken — Lanken [Laken] Riley, an innocent young woman who was killed.By an illegal. That’s right. But how many of thousands of people are being killed by legals?To her parents, I say: My heart goes out to you. Having lost children myself, I understand.But, look, if we change the dynamic at the border — people pay people — people pay these smugglers 8,000 bucks to get across the border because they know if they get by — if they get by and let into the country, it’s six to eight years before they have a hearing. And it’s worth the — taking the chance of the $8,000.But — but if it’s only six mon- — six weeks, the idea is it’s highly unlikely that people will pay that money and come all that way knowing that they’ll be — able to be kicked out quickly.Folks, I would respectfully su- — suggest to my friend in — my Republican friends owe it to the American people. Get this bill done. We need to act now.And if my predecessor is watching: Instead of paying [playing] politics and pressuring members of Congress to block the bill, join me in telling the Congress to pass it.We can do it together.But that’s what he apparently — here’s what he will not do.I will not demonize immigrants, saying they are “poison in the blood of our country.”I will not separate families.I will not ban people because of their faith.Unlike my predecessor, on my first day in office, I introduced a comprehensive bill to fix our immigration system. Take a look at it. It has all these and more: secure the border, provide a pathway to citizenship for DREAMers, and so much more.But unlike my predecessor, I know who we are as Americans. We’re the only nation in the world with a heart and soul that draws from old and new.Home to Native Americans whose ancestors have been here for thousands of years. Home to people of every pla- — from every place on Earth.They came freely. Some came in chains. Some came when famine struck, like my ancestral family in Ireland. Some to flee persecution, to chase dreams that are impossible anywhere but here in America.That’s America. And we all come from somewhere, but we’re all Americans.Look, folks, we have a simple choice: We can fight about fixing the border or we can fix it. I’m ready to fix it. Send me the border bill now.A transformational his- — moment in history happened 58 — 59 years ago today in Selma, Alabama. Hundreds of foot soldiers for justice marched across the Edmund Pettus Bridge, named after the Grand Dragon of the Ku Klux Klan, to claim their fundamental right to vote.They were beaten. They were bloodied and left for dead. Our late friend and former colleague John Lewis was on that march. We miss him.But joining us tonight are other marchers, both in the gallery and on the floor, including Bettie Mae Fikes, known as the “Voice of Selma.”The daughter of gospel singers and preachers, she sang songs of prayer and protest on that Bloody Sunday to help shake the nation’s conscience.Five months later, the Voting Rights Act passed and was signed into law.Thank you. Thank you, thank you, thank you.But 59 years later, there are forces taking us back in time: voter suppression, election subversion, unlimited dark money, extreme gerrymandering.John Lewis was a great friend to many of us here. But if you truly want to honor him and all the heroes who marched with him, then it’s time to do more than talk.Pass the Freedom to Vote Act, the John Lewis Voting Right[s] Act.And stop — stop denying another core value of America: our diversity across American life. Banning books is wrong. Instead of erasing history, let’s make history.I want to protect fundamental rights.Pass the Equality Act.And my message to transgender Americans: I have your back.Pass the PRO Act for workers’ rights.Raise the federal minimum wage, because every worker has the right to a decent living more than eig- — seven bucks an hour.We’re also making history by confronting the climate crisis, not denying it. I don’t think any of you think there’s no longer a climate crisis. At least, I hope you don’t.I’m taking the most significant action ever on climate in the history of the world.I’m cutting our carbon emissions in half by 2030; creating tens of thousands of clean energy jobs, like the IBEW workers building and installing 500,000 electric vehicle charging stations — ; conserving 30 percent of America’s lands and waters by 2030; and taking action on environmental justice — fence-line communities smothered by the legacy of pollution.And patterned after the Peace Corps and AmericaCorps [AmeriCorps], I launched the Climate Corps — — to put 20,000 young people to work in the forefront of our clean energy future. I’ll triple that number in a decade.To state the obvious, all Americans deserve the freedom to be safe. And America is safer today than when I took office.The year before I took office, murder rates went up 30 percent.Thirty percent, they went up — the biggest increase in history.It was then, through no — through my American Rescue Plan — which every American [Republican] voted against, I might add — we made the largest investment in public safety ever.Last year, the murder rate saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime fell to one of its lowest levels in more than 50 years.But we have more to do. We have to help cities invest in more community police officers, more mental health workers, more community violence intervention.Give communities the tools to crack down on gun crime, retail crime, and carjacking. Keep building trust, as I’ve been doing, by taking executive action on police reform and calling for it to be the law of the land.Directing my Cabinet to review the federal classification of marijuana and expunging thousands of convictions for the mere possession, because no one should be jailed for simply using or have it on their record.Take on crimes of domestic violence. I’m ramping up the federal enforcement of the Violence Against Women Act that I proudly wrote when I was a senator so we can finally — finally end the scourge against women in America.There are other kinds of violence I want to stop.With us tonight is Jasmine, whose nine-year-old sister Jackie was murdered with 21 classmates and teachers in her elementary school in Uvalde, Texas.Very soon after that happened, Jill and I went to Uvalde for a couple days. We spent hours and hours with each of the families. We heard their message so everyone in this room, in this chamber could hear the same message.The constant refrain — and I was there for hours, meeting with every family. They said, “Do something.” “Do something.”Well, I did do something by establishing the first-ever Office of Gun Violence Prevention in the White House, that the Vice President is leading the charge. Thank you for doing it.Meanwhile — meanwhile, my predecessor told the NRA he’s proud he did nothing on guns when he was President.After another shooting in Iowa recently, he said — when asked what to do about it, he said, just “get over it.” That was his quote. Just “get over it.”I say stop it. Stop it, stop it, stop it.I’m proud we beat the NRA when I signed the most significant gun safety law in nearly 30 years because of this Congress. We now must beat the NRA again.I’m demanding a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. Pass universal background checks.None of this — none of this — I taught the Second Amendment for 12 years. None of this violates the Second Amendment or vilifies responsible gun owners.You know, as we manage challenges at home, we’re also managing crises abroad, including in the Middle East.I know the last five months have been gut-wrenching for so many people — for the Israeli people, for the Palestinian people, and so many here in America.This crisis began on October 7th with a massacre by a terrorist group called Hamas, as you all know. One thousand two hundred innocent people — women and girls, men and boys — slaughtered after enduring sexual violence. The deadliest day of the — for the Jewish people since the Holocaust. And 250 hostages taken.Here in this chamber tonight are families whose loved ones are still being held by Hamas. I pledge to all the families that we will not rest until we bring every one of your loved ones home.We also — we will also work around the clock to bring home Evan and Paul — Americans being unjustly detained by the Russians — and others around the world.Israel has a right to go after Hamas. Hamas ended this conflict by releasing the hostages, laying down arms — could end it by — by releasing the hostages, laying down arms, and s- — surrendering those responsible for October 7th.But Israel has a h- — excuse me. Israel has a added burden because Hamas hides and operates among the civilian population like cowards — under hospitals, daycare centers, and all the like.Israel also has a fundamental responsibility, though, to protect innocent civilians in Gaza.This war has taken a greater toll on innocent civilians than all previous wars in Gaza combined. More than 30,000 Palestinians have been killed — most of whom are not Hamas. Thousands and thousands of innocents — women and children. Girls and boys also orphaned.Nearly 2 million more Palestinians under bombardment or displacement. Homes destroyed, neighborhoods in rubble, cities in ruin. Families without food, water, medicine.It’s heartbreaking.I’ve been working non-stop to establish an immediate ceasefire that would last for six weeks to get all the prisoners released — all the hostages released and to get the hostages home and to ease the intolerable an- — humanitarian crisis and build toward an enduring — a more — something more enduring.The United States has been leading international efforts to get more humanitarian assistance into Gaza. Tonight, I’m directing the U.S. military to lead an emergency mission to establish a temporary pier in the Mediterranean on the coast of Gaza that can receive large shipments carrying food, water, medicine, and temporary shelters.No U.S. boots will be on the ground.A temporary pier will enable a massive increase in the amount of humanitarian assistance getting into Gaza every day.And Israel must also do its part. Israel must allow more aid into Gaza and ensure humanitarian workers aren’t caught in the crossfire.And they’re announcing they’re going to — they’re going to ca- — have a crossing in Northern Gaza.To the leadership of Israel, I say this: Humanitarian assistance cannot be a secondary consideration or a bargaining chip. Protecting and saving innocent lives has to be a priority.As we look to the future, the only real solution to the situation is a two-state solution over time.And I say this as a lifelong supporter of Israel, my entire career. No one has a stronger record with Israel than I do. I challenge any of you here. I’m the only American president to visit Israel in wartime.But there is no other path that guarantees Israel’s security and democracy. There is no other path that guarantees Pa- — that Palestinians can live in peace with po- — with peace and dignity.And there is no other path that guarantees peace between Israel and all of its neighbors — including Saudi Arabia, with whom I’m talking.Creating stability in the Middle East also means containing the threat posed by Iran. That’s why I built a coalition of more than a dozen countries to defend international shipping and freedom of navigation in the Red Sea.I’ve ordered strikes to degrade the Houthi capability and defend U.S. forces in the region.As Commander-in-Chief, I will not hesitate to direct further measures to protect our people and our military personnel.For years, I’ve heard many of my Republican and Democratic friends say that China is on the rise and America is falling behind. They’ve got it backwards. I’ve been saying it for over four years, even when I wasn’t president.America is rising. We have the best economy in the world. And since I’ve come to office, our GTB [GDP] is up, our trade deficit with China is down to the lowest point in over a decade.And we’re standing up against China’s unfair economic practices.We’re standing up for peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits.I’ve revitalized our partnership and alliance in the Pacific: India, Australia, Japan, South Korea, the Pacific Islands. I’ve made sure that the most advanced American technologies can’t be used in China — not allowing to trade them there.Frankly, for all his tough talk on China, it never occurred to my predecessor to do any of that.I want competition with China, not conflict. And we’re in a stronger position to win the conflict [competition] of the 21st century against China than anyone else for that matter — than at any time as well.Here at home, I’ve signed over 400 bipartisan bills. But there’s more to pass my Unity Agenda.Strengthen penalties on fentanyl trafficking. You don’t want to do that, huh?Pass bipartisan privacy legislation to protect our children online.Harness — harness the promise of AI to protect us from peril. Ban AI voice impersonations and more.And keep our truly sacred obligation to train and equip those we send into harm’s way and care for them and their families when they come home and when they don’t.That’s why, with the strong support and help of Denis and the VA, I signed the PACT Act — — one of the most significant laws ever, helping millions of veterans exposed to toxins who now are battling more than 100 different cancers. Many of them don’t come home, but we owe them and their families support.And we owe it to ourselves to keep supporting our new health research agency called ARPA-H — — and remind us — to remind us that we can do big things, like end cancer as we know it. And we will.Let me close with this.Yay! (Applause and laughter.)I know you don’t want to hear anymore, Lindsey, but I got to say a few more things.I know I may not look like it, but I’ve been around a while. When you get to be my age, certain things become clearer than ever.I know the American story. Again and again, I’ve seen the contest between competing forces in the battle for the soul of our nation, between those who want to pull America back to the past and those who want to move America into the future.My lifetime has taught me to embrace freedom and democracy, a future based on core values that have defined America — honesty, decency, dignity, and equality — ; to respect everyone; to give everyone a fair shot; to give hate no safe harbor.Now, other people my age see it differently. The American story of resentment, revenge, and retribution.That’s not me. I was born amid World War Two, when America stood for the freedom of the world. I grew up in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and Claymont, Delaware, among working-class people who built this country.I watched in horror as two of my heroes — like many of you did — Dr. King and Bobby Kennedy, were assassinated. And their legacies inspired me to pur- — pursue a career in service.I left a law firm and became a public defender because my city of Wilmington was the only city in America occupied by the National Guard after Dr. King was assassinated because of the riots. And I became a county councilman almost by accident.I got elected to the United States Senate when I had no intention of running, at age 29.Then vice president to our first Black president. Now a president to the first woman vice president.In my career, I’ve been told I was too young. By the way, they didn’t let me on the Senate elevators for votes sometimes. They — not a joke.And I’ve been told I am too old.Whether young or old, I’ve always been known — I’ve always known what endures. I’ve known our North Star. The very idea of America is that we’re all created equal, deserves to be treated equally throughout our lives.We’ve never fully lived up to that idea, but we’ve never walked away from it either. And I won’t walk away from it now.I’m optimistic. I really am. I’m optimistic, Nancy.My fellow Americans, the issue facing our nation isn’t how old we are; it’s how old are our ideas.Hate, anger, revenge, retribution are the oldest of ideas. But you can’t lead America with ancient ideas that only take us back. To lead America, the land of possibilities, you need a vision for the future and what can and should be done.Tonight, you’ve heard mine.I see a future where [we’re] defending democracy, you don’t diminish it.I see a future where we restore the right to choose and protect our freedoms, not take them away.I see a future where the middle class has — finally has a fair shot and the wealthy have to pay their fair share in taxes.I see a future where we save the planet from the climate crisis and our country from gun violence.Above all, I see a future for all Americans. I see a country for all Americans. And I will always be President for all Americans because I believe in America. I believe in you, the American people. You’re the reason we’ve never been more optimistic about our future than I am now.So, let’s build the future together. Let’s remember who we are.We are the United States of America. And there is nothing — nothing beyond our capacity when we act together.God bless you all. And may God protect our troops. Thank you, thank you, thank you.


View TranscriptTranscript
Chief Justice Roberts, Vice President Harris, Speaker Pelosi, Leader Schumer, Leader McConnell, Vice President Pence, distinguished guests, and my fellow Americans.
This is America’s day.
This is democracy’s day.
A day of history and hope.
Of renewal and resolve.
Through a crucible for the ages America has been tested anew and America has risen to the challenge.
Today, we celebrate the triumph not of a candidate, but of a cause, the cause of democracy.
The will of the people has been heard and the will of the people has been heeded.
We have learned again that democracy is precious.
Democracy is fragile.
And at this hour, my friends, democracy has prevailed.
So now, on this hallowed ground where just days ago violence sought to shake this Capitol’s very foundation, we come together as one nation, under God, indivisible, to carry out the peaceful transfer of power as we have for more than two centuries.
We look ahead in our uniquely American way – restless, bold, optimistic – and set our sights on the nation we know we can be and we must be.
I thank my predecessors of both parties for their presence here.
I thank them from the bottom of my heart.
You know the resilience of our Constitution and the strength of our nation.
As does President Carter, who I spoke to last night but who cannot be with us today, but whom we salute for his lifetime of service.
I have just taken the sacred oath each of these patriots took — an oath first sworn by George Washington.
But the American story depends not on any one of us, not on some of us, but on all of us.
On “We the People” who seek a more perfect Union.
This is a great nation and we are a good people.
Over the centuries through storm and strife, in peace and in war, we have come so far. But we still have far to go.
We will press forward with speed and urgency, for we have much to do in this winter of peril and possibility.
Much to repair.
Much to restore.
Much to heal.
Much to build.
And much to gain.
Few periods in our nation’s history have been more challenging or difficult than the one we’re in now.
A once-in-a-century virus silently stalks the country.
It’s taken as many lives in one year as America lost in all of World War II.
Millions of jobs have been lost.
Hundreds of thousands of businesses closed.
A cry for racial justice some 400 years in the making moves us. The dream of justice for all will be deferred no longer.
A cry for survival comes from the planet itself. A cry that can’t be any more desperate or any more clear.
And now, a rise in political extremism, white supremacy, domestic terrorism that we must confront and we will defeat.
To overcome these challenges – to restore the soul and to secure the future of America – requires more than words.
It requires that most elusive of things in a democracy:
Unity.
Unity.
In another January in Washington, on New Year’s Day 1863, Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
When he put pen to paper, the President said, “If my name ever goes down into history it will be for this act and my whole soul is in it.”
My whole soul is in it.
Today, on this January day, my whole soul is in this:
Bringing America together.
Uniting our people.
And uniting our nation.
I ask every American to join me in this cause.
Uniting to fight the common foes we face:
Anger, resentment, hatred.
Extremism, lawlessness, violence.
Disease, joblessness, hopelessness.
With unity we can do great things. Important things.
We can right wrongs.
We can put people to work in good jobs.
We can teach our children in safe schools.
We can overcome this deadly virus.
We can reward work, rebuild the middle class, and make health care
secure for all.
We can deliver racial justice.
We can make America, once again, the leading force for good in the world.
I know speaking of unity can sound to some like a foolish fantasy.
I know the forces that divide us are deep and they are real.
But I also know they are not new.
Our history has been a constant struggle between the American ideal that we are all created equal and the harsh, ugly reality that racism, nativism, fear, and demonization have long torn us apart.
The battle is perennial.
Victory is never assured.
Through the Civil War, the Great Depression, World War, 9/11, through struggle, sacrifice, and setbacks, our “better angels” have always prevailed.
In each of these moments, enough of us came together to carry all of us forward.
And, we can do so now.
History, faith, and reason show the way, the way of unity.
We can see each other not as adversaries but as neighbors.
We can treat each other with dignity and respect.
We can join forces, stop the shouting, and lower the temperature.
For without unity, there is no peace, only bitterness and fury.
No progress, only exhausting outrage.
No nation, only a state of chaos.
This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge, and unity is the path forward.
And, we must meet this moment as the United States of America.
If we do that, I guarantee you, we will not fail.
We have never, ever, ever failed in America when we have acted together.
And so today, at this time and in this place, let us start afresh.
All of us.
Let us listen to one another.
Hear one another.
See one another.
Show respect to one another.
Politics need not be a raging fire destroying everything in its path.
Every disagreement doesn’t have to be a cause for total war.
And, we must reject a culture in which facts themselves are manipulated and even manufactured.
My fellow Americans, we have to be different than this.
America has to be better than this.
And, I believe America is better than this.
Just look around.
Here we stand, in the shadow of a Capitol dome that was completed amid the Civil War, when the Union itself hung in the balance.
Yet we endured and we prevailed.
Here we stand looking out to the great Mall where Dr. King spoke of his dream.
Here we stand, where 108 years ago at another inaugural, thousands of protestors tried to block brave women from marching for the right to vote.
Today, we mark the swearing-in of the first woman in American history elected to national office – Vice President Kamala Harris.
Don’t tell me things can’t change.
Here we stand across the Potomac from Arlington National Cemetery, where heroes who gave the last full measure of devotion rest in eternal peace.
And here we stand, just days after a riotous mob thought they could use violence to silence the will of the people, to stop the work of our democracy, and to drive us from this sacred ground.
That did not happen.
It will never happen.
Not today.
Not tomorrow.
Not ever.
To all those who supported our campaign I am humbled by the faith you have placed in us.
To all those who did not support us, let me say this: Hear me out as we move forward. Take a measure of me and my heart.
And if you still disagree, so be it.
That’s democracy. That’s America. The right to dissent peaceably, within the guardrails of our Republic, is perhaps our nation’s greatest strength.
Yet hear me clearly: Disagreement must not lead to disunion.
And I pledge this to you: I will be a President for all Americans.
I will fight as hard for those who did not support me as for those who did.
Many centuries ago, Saint Augustine, a saint of my church, wrote that a people was a multitude defined by the common objects of their love.
What are the common objects we love that define us as Americans?
I think I know.
Opportunity.
Security.
Liberty.
Dignity.
Respect.
Honor.
And, yes, the truth.
Recent weeks and months have taught us a painful lesson.
There is truth and there are lies.
Lies told for power and for profit.
And each of us has a duty and responsibility, as citizens, as Americans, and especially as leaders – leaders who have pledged to honor our Constitution and protect our nation — to defend the truth and to defeat the lies.
I understand that many Americans view the future with some fear and trepidation.
I understand they worry about their jobs, about taking care of their families, about what comes next.
I get it.
But the answer is not to turn inward, to retreat into competing factions, distrusting those who don’t look like you do, or worship the way you do, or don’t get their news from the same sources you do.
We must end this uncivil war that pits red against blue, rural versus urban, conservative versus liberal.
We can do this if we open our souls instead of hardening our hearts.
If we show a little tolerance and humility.
If we’re willing to stand in the other person’s shoes just for a moment.
Because here is the thing about life: There is no accounting for what fate will deal you.
There are some days when we need a hand.
There are other days when we’re called on to lend one.
That is how we must be with one another.
And, if we are this way, our country will be stronger, more prosperous, more ready for the future.
My fellow Americans, in the work ahead of us, we will need each other.
We will need all our strength to persevere through this dark winter.
We are entering what may well be the toughest and deadliest period of the virus.
We must set aside the politics and finally face this pandemic as one nation.
I promise you this: as the Bible says weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning.
We will get through this, together
The world is watching today.
So here is my message to those beyond our borders: America has been tested and we have come out stronger for it.
We will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again.
Not to meet yesterday’s challenges, but today’s and tomorrow’s.
We will lead not merely by the example of our power but by the power of our example.
We will be a strong and trusted partner for peace, progress, and security.
We have been through so much in this nation.
And, in my first act as President, I would like to ask you to join me in a moment of silent prayer to remember all those we lost this past year to the pandemic.
To those 400,000 fellow Americans – mothers and fathers, husbands and wives, sons and daughters, friends, neighbors, and co-workers.
We will honor them by becoming the people and nation we know we can and should be.
Let us say a silent prayer for those who lost their lives, for those they left behind, and for our country.
Amen.
This is a time of testing.
We face an attack on democracy and on truth.
A raging virus.
Growing inequity.
The sting of systemic racism.
A climate in crisis.
America’s role in the world.
Any one of these would be enough to challenge us in profound ways.
But the fact is we face them all at once, presenting this nation with the gravest of responsibilities.
Now we must step up.
All of us.
It is a time for boldness, for there is so much to do.
And, this is certain.
We will be judged, you and I, for how we resolve the cascading crises of our era.
Will we rise to the occasion?
Will we master this rare and difficult hour?
Will we meet our obligations and pass along a new and better world for our children?
I believe we must and I believe we will.
And when we do, we will write the next chapter in the American story.
It’s a story that might sound something like a song that means a lot to me.
It’s called “American Anthem” and there is one verse stands out for me:
“The work and prayers
of centuries have brought us to this day
What shall be our legacy?
What will our children say?…
Let me know in my heart
When my days are through
America
America
I gave my best to you.”
Let us add our own work and prayers to the unfolding story of our nation.
If we do this then when our days are through our children and our children’s children will say of us they gave their best.
They did their duty.
They healed a broken land.
My fellow Americans, I close today where I began, with a sacred oath.
Before God and all of you I give you my word.
I will always level with you.
I will defend the Constitution.
I will defend our democracy.
I will defend America.
I will give my all in your service thinking not of power, but of possibilities.
Not of personal interest, but of the public good.
And together, we shall write an American story of hope, not fear.
Of unity, not division.
Of light, not darkness.
An American story of decency and dignity.
Of love and of healing.
Of greatness and of goodness.
May this be the story that guides us.
The story that inspires us.
The story that tells ages yet to come that we answered the call of history.
We met the moment.
That democracy and hope, truth and justice, did not die on our watch but thrived.
That our America secured liberty at home and stood once again as a beacon to the world.
That is what we owe our forebearers, one another, and generations to follow.
So, with purpose and resolve we turn to the tasks of our time.
Sustained by faith.
Driven by conviction.
And, devoted to one another and to this country we love with all our hearts.
May God bless America and may God protect our troops.
Thank you, America.


View TranscriptTranscript
My fellow Americans: Four years ago, we launched a great national effort to rebuild our country, to renew its spirit, and to restore the allegiance of this government to its citizens. In short, we embarked on a mission to make America great again — for all Americans.
As I conclude my term as the 45th President of the United States, I stand before you truly proud of what we have achieved together. We did what we came here to do — and so much more.
This week, we inaugurate a new administration and pray for its success in keeping America safe and prosperous. We extend our best wishes, and we also want them to have luck — a very important word.
I’d like to begin by thanking just a few of the amazing people who made our remarkable journey possible.
First, let me express my overwhelming gratitude for the love and support of our spectacular First Lady, Melania. Let me also share my deepest appreciation to my daughter Ivanka, my son-in-law Jared, and to Barron, Don, Eric, Tiffany, and Lara. You fill my world with light and with joy.
I also want to thank Vice President Mike Pence, his wonderful wife Karen, and the entire Pence family.
Thank you as well to my Chief of Staff, Mark Meadows; the dedicated members of the White House Staff and the Cabinet; and all the incredible people across our administration who poured out their heart and soul to fight for America.
I also want to take a moment to thank a truly exceptional group of people: the United States Secret Service. My family and I will forever be in your debt. My profound gratitude as well to everyone in the White House Military Office, the teams of Marine One and Air Force One, every member of the Armed Forces, and state and local law enforcement all across our country.
Most of all, I want to thank the American people. To serve as your President has been an honor beyond description. Thank you for this extraordinary privilege. And that’s what it is — a great privilege and a great honor.
We must never forget that while Americans will always have our disagreements, we are a nation of incredible, decent, faithful, and peace-loving citizens who all want our country to thrive and flourish and be very, very successful and good. We are a truly magnificent nation.
All Americans were horrified by the assault on our Capitol. Political violence is an attack on everything we cherish as Americans. It can never be tolerated.
Now more than ever, we must unify around our shared values and rise above the partisan rancor, and forge our common destiny.
Four years ago, I came to Washington as the only true outsider ever to win the presidency. I had not spent my career as a politician, but as a builder looking at open skylines and imagining infinite possibilities. I ran for President because I knew there were towering new summits for America just waiting to be scaled. I knew the potential for our nation was boundless as long as we put America first.
So I left behind my former life and stepped into a very difficult arena, but an arena nevertheless, with all sorts of potential if properly done. America had given me so much, and I wanted to give something back.
Together with millions of hardworking patriots across this land, we built the greatest political movement in the history of our country. We also built the greatest economy in the history of the world. It was about “America First” because we all wanted to make America great again. We restored the principle that a nation exists to serve its citizens. Our agenda was not about right or left, it wasn’t about Republican or Democrat, but about the good of a nation, and that means the whole nation.
With the support and prayers of the American people, we achieved more than anyone thought possible. Nobody thought we could even come close.
We passed the largest package of tax cuts and reforms in American history. We slashed more job-killing regulations than any administration had ever done before. We fixed our broken trade deals, withdrew from the horrible Trans-Pacific Partnership and the impossible Paris Climate Accord, renegotiated the one-sided South Korea deal, and we replaced NAFTA with the groundbreaking USMCA — that’s Mexico and Canada — a deal that’s worked out very, very well.
Also, and very importantly, we imposed historic and monumental tariffs on China; made a great new deal with China. But before the ink was even dry, we and the whole world got hit with the China virus. Our trade relationship was rapidly changing, billions and billions of dollars were pouring into the U.S., but the virus forced us to go in a different direction.
The whole world suffered, but America outperformed other countries economically because of our incredible economy and the economy that we built. Without the foundations and footings, it wouldn’t have worked out this way. We wouldn’t have some of the best numbers we’ve ever had.
We also unlocked our energy resources and became the world’s number-one producer of oil and natural gas by far. Powered by these policies, we built the greatest economy in the history of the world. We reignited America’s job creation and achieved record-low unemployment for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, women — almost everyone.
Incomes soared, wages boomed, the American Dream was restored, and millions were lifted from poverty in just a few short years. It was a miracle. The stock market set one record after another, with 148 stock market highs during this short period of time, and boosted the retirements and pensions of hardworking citizens all across our nation. 401(k)s are at a level they’ve never been at before. We’ve never seen numbers like we’ve seen, and that’s before the pandemic and after the pandemic.
We rebuilt the American manufacturing base, opened up thousands of new factories, and brought back the beautiful phrase: “Made in the USA.”
To make life better for working families, we doubled the child tax credit and signed the largest-ever expansion of funding for childcare and development. We joined with the private sector to secure commitments to train more than 16 million American workers for the jobs of tomorrow.
When our nation was hit with the terrible pandemic, we produced not one, but two vaccines with record-breaking speed, and more will quickly follow. They said it couldn’t be done but we did it. They call it a “medical miracle,” and that’s what they’re calling it right now: a “medical miracle.”
Another administration would have taken 3, 4, 5, maybe even up to 10 years to develop a vaccine. We did in nine months.
We grieve for every life lost, and we pledge in their memory to wipe out this horrible pandemic once and for all.
When the virus took its brutal toll on the world’s economy, we launched the fastest economic recovery our country has ever seen. We passed nearly $4 trillion in economic relief, saved or supported over 50 million jobs, and slashed the unemployment rate in half. These are numbers that our country has never seen before.
We created choice and transparency in healthcare, stood up to big pharma in so many ways, but especially in our effort to get favored-nations clauses added, which will give us the lowest prescription drug prices anywhere in the world.
We passed VA Choice, VA Accountability, Right to Try, and landmark criminal justice reform.
We confirmed three new justices of the United States Supreme Court. We appointed nearly 300 federal judges to interpret our Constitution as written.
For years, the American people pleaded with Washington to finally secure the nation’s borders. I am pleased to say we answered that plea and achieved the most secure border in U.S. history. We have given our brave border agents and heroic ICE officers the tools they need to do their jobs better than they have ever done before, and to enforce our laws and keep America safe.
We proudly leave the next administration with the strongest and most robust border security measures ever put into place. This includes historic agreements with Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, along with more than 450 miles of powerful new wall.
We restored American strength at home and American leadership abroad. The world respects us again. Please don’t lose that respect.
We reclaimed our sovereignty by standing up for America at the United Nations and withdrawing from the one-sided global deals that never served our interests. And NATO countries are now paying hundreds of billions of dollars more than when I arrived just a few years ago. It was very unfair. We were paying the cost for the world. Now the world is helping us.
And perhaps most importantly of all, with nearly $3 trillion, we fully rebuilt the American military — all made in the USA. We launched the first new branch of the United States Armed Forces in 75 years: the Space Force. And last spring, I stood at Kennedy Space Center in Florida and watched as American astronauts returned to space on American rockets for the first time in many, many years.
We revitalized our alliances and rallied the nations of the world to stand up to China like never before.
We obliterated the ISIS caliphate and ended the wretched life of its founder and leader, al Baghdadi. We stood up to the oppressive Iranian regime and killed the world’s top terrorist, Iranian butcher Qasem Soleimani.
We recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and recognized Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights.
As a result of our bold diplomacy and principled realism, we achieved a series of historic peace deals in the Middle East. Nobody believed it could happen. The Abraham Accords opened the doors to a future of peace and harmony, not violence and bloodshed. It is the dawn of a new Middle East, and we are bringing our soldiers home.
I am especially proud to be the first President in decades who has started no new wars.
Above all, we have reasserted the sacred idea that, in America, the government answers to the people. Our guiding light, our North Star, our unwavering conviction has been that we are here to serve the noble everyday citizens of America. Our allegiance is not to the special interests, corporations, or global entities; it’s to our children, our citizens, and to our nation itself.
As President, my top priority, my constant concern, has always been the best interests of American workers and American families. I did not seek the easiest course; by far, it was actually the most difficult. I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism. I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do. Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus.
This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: Together, we put the American people back in charge of our country. We restored self-government. We restored the idea that in America no one is forgotten, because everyone matters and everyone has a voice. We fought for the principle that every citizen is entitled to equal dignity, equal treatment, and equal rights because we are all made equal by God. Everyone is entitled to be treated with respect, to have their voice heard, and to have their government listen. You are loyal to your country, and my administration was always loyal to you.
We worked to build a country in which every citizen could find a great job and support their wonderful families. We fought for the communities where every American could be safe and schools where every child could learn. We promoted a culture where our laws would be upheld, our heroes honored, our history preserved, and law-abiding citizens are never taken for granted. Americans should take tremendous satisfaction in all that we have achieved together. It’s incredible.
Now, as I leave the White House, I have been reflecting on the dangers that threaten the priceless inheritance we all share. As the world’s most powerful nation, America faces constant threats and challenges from abroad. But the greatest danger we face is a loss of confidence in ourselves, a loss of confidence in our national greatness. A nation is only as strong as its spirit. We are only as dynamic as our pride. We are only as vibrant as the faith that beats in the hearts of our people.
No nation can long thrive that loses faith in its own values, history, and heroes, for these are the very sources of our unity and our vitality.
What has always allowed America to prevail and triumph over the great challenges of the past has been an unyielding and unashamed conviction in the nobility of our country and its unique purpose in history. We must never lose this conviction. We must never forsake our belief in America.
The key to national greatness lies in sustaining and instilling our shared national identity. That means focusing on what we have in common: the heritage that we all share.
At the center of this heritage is also a robust belief in free expression, free speech, and open debate. Only if we forget who we are, and how we got here, could we ever allow political censorship and blacklisting to take place in America. It’s not even thinkable. Shutting down free and open debate violates our core values and most enduring traditions.
In America, we don’t insist on absolute conformity or enforce rigid orthodoxies and punitive speech codes. We just don’t do that. America is not a timid nation of tame souls who need to be sheltered and protected from those with whom we disagree. That’s not who we are. It will never be who we are.
For nearly 250 years, in the face of every challenge, Americans have always summoned our unmatched courage, confidence, and fierce independence. These are the miraculous traits that once led millions of everyday citizens to set out across a wild continent and carve out a new life in the great West. It was the same profound love of our God-given freedom that willed our soldiers into battle and our astronauts into space.
As I think back on the past four years, one image rises in my mind above all others. Whenever I traveled all along the motorcade route, there were thousands and thousands of people. They came out with their families so that they could stand as we passed, and proudly wave our great American flag. It never failed to deeply move me. I knew that they did not just come out to show their support of me; they came out to show me their support and love for our country.
This is a republic of proud citizens who are united by our common conviction that America is the greatest nation in all of history. We are, and must always be, a land of hope, of light, and of glory to all the world. This is the precious inheritance that we must safeguard at every single turn.
For the past four years, I have worked to do just that. From a great hall of Muslim leaders in Riyadh to a great square of Polish people in Warsaw; from the floor of the Korean Assembly to the podium at the United Nations General Assembly; and from the Forbidden City in Beijing to the shadow of Mount Rushmore, I fought for you, I fought for your family, I fought for our country. Above all, I fought for America and all it stands for — and that is safe, strong, proud, and free.
Now, as I prepare to hand power over to a new administration at noon on Wednesday, I want you to know that the movement we started is only just beginning. There’s never been anything like it. The belief that a nation must serve its citizens will not dwindle but instead only grow stronger by the day.
As long as the American people hold in their hearts deep and devoted love of country, then there is nothing that this nation cannot achieve. Our communities will flourish. Our people will be prosperous. Our traditions will be cherished. Our faith will be strong. And our future will be brighter than ever before.
I go from this majestic place with a loyal and joyful heart, an optimistic spirit, and a supreme confidence that for our country and for our children, the best is yet to come.
Thank you, and farewell. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.


View Transcriptgood evening, my fellow americans. tonight, i’d like to talk to you about where we are as we mark one year since everything stopped because of this pandemic. a year ago, we were hit with a virus that was met with silence and spread unchecked. denials for days, weeks, then months that led to more deaths, more infections, more stress, and more loneliness. photos and videos from 2019 feel like they were taken in another era. the last vacation. the last birthday with friends. the last holiday with the extended family. while it was different for everyone, we all lost something. a collective suffering. a collective sacrifice. a year filled with the loss of life — and the loss of living for all of us. but, in the loss, we saw how much there was to gain in appreciation, respect, and gratitude. finding light in the darkness is a very american thing to do. in fact, it may be the most american thing we do. and that’s what we’ve done. we’ve seen frontline and essential workers risking their lives — sometimes losing them — to save and help others. researchers and scientists racing for a vaccine. and so many of you, as hemingway wrote, being strong in all the broken places. i know it’s been hard. i truly know. as i’ve told you before, i carry a card in my pocket with the number of americans who have died from covid to date. it’s on the back of my schedule. as of now, the total deaths in america: 527,726. that’s more deaths than in world war one, world war two, the vietnam war, and 9/11 combined. they were husbands, wives, sons and daughters, grandparents, friends, neighbors — young and old. they leave behind loved ones unable to truly grieve or to heal, even to have a funeral. but i’m also thinking about everyone else who lost this past year to natural causes, by cruel fate of accident, or other diseases. they, too, died alone. they, too, leave loved ones behind who are hurting badly. you know, you’ve often heard me say before, i talk about the longest walk any parent can make is up a short flight of stairs to his child’s bedroom to say, “i’m sorry. i lost my job. we can’t be here anymore.” like my dad told me when he lost his job in scranton. so many of you have had to make that same walk this past year. you lost your job. you closed your business. facing eviction, homelessness, hunger, a loss of control, and, maybe worst of all, a loss of hope. watching a generation of children who may be set back up to a year or more — because they’ve not been in school — because of their loss of learning. it’s the details of life that matter most, and we’ve missed those details. the big details and small moments. weddings, birthdays, graduations — all the things that needed to happen but didn’t. the first date. the family reunions. the sunday night rituals. it’s all has exacted a terrible cost on the psyche of so many of us. for we are fundamentally a people who want to be with others — to talk, to laugh, to hug, to hold one another. but this virus has kept us apart. grandparents haven’t seen their children or grandchildren. parents haven’t seen their kids. kids haven’t seen their friends. the things we used to do that always filled us with joy have become the things we couldn’t do and broke our hearts. too often, we’ve turned against one another. a mask — the easiest thing to do to save lives — sometimes it divides us. states pitted against one other instead of working with each other. vicious hate crimes against asian americans, who have been attacked, harassed, blamed, and scapegoated. at this very moment, so many of them — our fellow americans — they’re on the frontlines of this pandemic, trying to save lives, and still — still — they are forced to live in fear for their lives just walking down streets in america. it’s wrong, it’s un-american, and it must stop. look, we know what we need to do to beat this virus: tell the truth. follow the scientists and the science. work together. put trust and faith in our government to fulfill its most important function, which is protecting the american people — no function more important. we need to remember the government isn’t some foreign force in a distant capital. no, it’s us. all of us. “we the people.” for you and i, that america thrives when we give our hearts, when we turn our hands to common purpose. and right now, my friends, we are doing just that. and i have to say, as your president, i am grateful to you. last summer, i was in philadelphia, and i met a small-business owner — a woman. i asked her — i said, “what do you need most?” i’ll never forget what she said to me. she said — looking me in the eye, she said, “i just want the truth. the truth. just tell me the truth.” think of that. my fellow americans, you’re owed nothing less than the truth. and for all of you asking when things will get back to normal, here is the truth: the only way to get our lives back, to get our economy back on track is to beat the virus. you’ve been hearing me say that for — while i was running and the last 50 days i’ve been president. but this is one of the most complex operations we’ve under- — ever undertaken as a nation in a long time. that’s why i’m using every power i have as president of the united states to put us on a war footing to get the job done. it sounds like hyperbole, but i mean it: a war footing. and thank god we’re making some real progress now. on my first full day in office, i outlined for you a comprehensive strategy to beat this pandemic. and we have spent every day since attempting to carry it out. two months ago, the country — this country didn’t have nearly enough vaccine supply to vaccinate all or near all of the american public. but soon we will. we’ve been working with the vaccine manufacturers — pfizer, moderna, johnson & johnson — to manufacture and purchase hundreds of millions of doses of these three safe, effective vaccines. and now, at the direction and with the assistance of my administration, johnson & johnson is working together with a competitor, merck, to speed up and increase the capacity to manufacture new johnson & johnson vaccine, which is one shot. in fact, just yesterday, i announced — and i met with the ceos of both companies — i announced our plan to buy an additional 100 million doses of johnson & johnson vaccines. these two companies — competitors — have come together for the good of the nation, and they should be applauded for it. it’s truly a national effort, just like we saw during world war ii. now because of all the work we’ve done, we’ll have enough vaccine supply for all adults in america by the end of may. that’s months ahead of schedule. and we’re mobilizing thousands of vaccinators to put the vaccine in one’s arm. calling on active duty military, fema, retired doctors and nurses, administrators, and those to administer the shots. and we’ve been creating more places to get the shots. we’ve made it possible for you to get a vaccine at nearly one — any one of nearly 10,000 pharmacies across the country, just like you get your flu shot. we’re also working with governors and mayors, in red states and blue states, to set up and support nearly 600 federally supported vaccination centers that administer hundreds of thousands of shots per day. you can drive up to a stadium or a large parking lot, get your shot, never leave your car, and drive home in less than an hour. we’ve been sending vaccines to hundreds of community health centers all across america, located in underserved areas. and we’ve been deploying and we will deploy more mobile vehicles and pop-up clinics to meet you where you live so those who are least able to get the vaccine are able to get it. we continue to work on making at-home testing available. and we’ve been focused on serving people in the hardest-hit communities of this pandemic — black, latino, native american, and rural communities. so, what does all this add up to? when i took office 50 days ago, only 8 percent of americans after months — only 8 percent of those over the age of 65 had gotten their first vaccination. today, that number is [nearly] 65 percent. just 14 percent of americans over the age 75, 50 days ago, had gotten their first shot. today, that number is well over 70 percent. with new guidance from the centers for disease control and prevention — the cdc — that came out on monday, it means simply this: millions and millions of grandparents who went months without being able to hug their grandkids can now do so. and the more people who are fully vaccinated, the cd [cdc] will continue to provide guidance on what you can do in the workplace, places of worship, with friends, and as well as travel. when i came into office, you may recall, i set a goal that many of you said was, kind of, way over the top. i said i intended to get 100 million shots in people’s arms in my first 100 days in office. tonight, i can say we are not only going to meet that goal, we’re going to beat that goal. because we’re actually on track to reach this goal of 100 million shots in arms on my 60th day in office. no other country in the world has done this. none. now i want to talk about the next steps we’re thinking about. first, tonight, i’m announcing that i will direct all states, tribes, and territories to make all adults — people 18 and over — eligible to be vaccinated no later than may 1. let me say that again: all adult americans will be eligible to get a vaccine no later than may 1. that’s much earlier than expected. let me be clear: that doesn’t mean everyone’s going to have that shot immediately, but it means you’ll be able to get in line beginning may 1. every adult will be eligible to get their shot. to do this, we’re going to go from a million shots a day that i promised in december, before i was sworn in, to maintaining — beating our current pace of two million shots a day, outpacing the rest of the world. secondly, at the time when every adult is eligible in may, we will launch, with our partners, new tools to make it easier for you to find the vaccine and where to get the shot, including a new website that will help you first find the place to get vaccinated and the one nearest you. no more searching day and night for an appointment for you and your loved ones. thirdly, with the passage of the american rescue plan — and i thank again the house and senate for passing it — and my announcement last month of a plan to vaccinate teachers and school staff, including bus drivers, we can accelerate the massive, nationwide effort to reopen our schools safely and meet my goal, that i stated at the same time about 100 million shots, of opening the majority of k-8 schools in my first 100 days in office. this is going to be the number one priority of my new secretary of education, miguel cardona. fourth, in the coming weeks, we will issue further guidance on what you can and cannot do once fully vaccinated, to lessen the confusion, to keep people safe, and encourage more people to get vaccinated. and finally, fifth, and maybe most importantly: i promise i will do everything in my power, i will not relent until we beat this virus, but i need you, the american people. i need you. i need every american to do their part. and that’s not hyperbole. i need you. i need you to get vaccinated when it’s your turn and when you can find an opportunity, and to help your family and friends and neighbors get vaccinated as well. because here’s the point: if we do all this, if we do our part, if we do this together, by july the 4th, there’s a good chance you, your families, and friends will be able to get together in your backyard or in your neighborhood and have a cookout and a barbeque and celebrate independence day. that doesn’t mean large events with lots of people together, but it does mean small groups will be able to get together. after this long hard year, that will make this independence day something truly special, where we not only mark our independence as a nation, but we begin to mark our independence from this virus. but to get there, we can’t let our guard down. this fight is far from order — from over. as i told the woman in pennsylvania, “i will tell you the truth.” a july 4th with your loved ones is the goal. but a goal — a lot can happen; conditions can change. the scientists have made clear that things may get worse again as new variants of the virus spread. and we’ve got work to do to ensure everyone has confidence in the safety and effectiveness of all three vaccines. so my message to you is this: listen to dr. fauci, one of the most distinguished and trusted voices in the world. he has assured us the vaccines are safe. they underwent rigorous scientific review. i know they’re safe. vice president harris and i know they’re safe. that’s why we got the vaccine publicly in front of cameras so — for the world to see, so you could see us do it. the first lady and the second gentleman also got vaccinated. talk to your family, your friends, your neighbors — the people you know best who’ve gotten the vaccine. we need everyone to get vaccinated. we need everyone to keep washing their hands, stay socially distanced, and keep wearing the masks as recommended by the cdc. because even if we devote every resource we have, beating this virus and getting back to normal depends on national unity. and national unity isn’t just how politics and politicians vote in washington or what the loudest voices say on cable or online. unity is what we do together as fellow americans. because if we don’t stay vigilant and the conditions change, then we may have to reinstate restrictions to get back on track. and, please, we don’t want to do again. we’ve made so much progress. this is not the time to let up. just as we are emerging from a dark winter into a hopeful spring and summer is not the time to not stick with the rules. i’ll close with this. we’ve lost so much over the last year. we’ve lost family and friends. we’ve lost businesses and dreams we spent years building. we’ve lost time — time with each other. and our children have lost so much time with their friends, time with their schools. no graduation ceremonies this — this spring. no graduations from college, high school, moving-up ceremonies. you know, and there’s something else we lost. we lost faith in whether our government and our democracy can deliver on really hard things for the american people. but as i stand here tonight, we’re proving once again something i have said time and time again until they’re probably tired of hearing me say it. i say it foreign leaders and domestic alike: it’s never, ever a good bet to bet against the american people. america is coming back. the development, manufacture, and distribution of the vaccines in record time is a true miracle of science. it is one of the most extraordinary achievements any country has ever accomplished. and we also just saw the perseverance rover land on mars. stunning images of our dreams that are now a reality. another example of the extraordinary american ingenuity, commitment, and belief in science and one another. and today, i signed into law the american rescue plan, an historic piece of legislation that delivers immediate relief to millions of people. it includes $1,400 in direct rescue checks — payments. that means a typical family of four earning about $110,000 will get checks for $5,600 deposited if they have direct deposit or in a check — a treasury check. it extends unemployment benefits. it helps small businesses. it lowers healthcare premiums for many. it provides food and nutrition, keeps families in their homes. and it will cut child poverty in this country in half, according to the experts. and it fi- — and it funds all the steps i’ve just described to beat the virus and create millions of jobs. in the coming weeks and months, i’ll be traveling, along with the first lady, the vice president, the second gentleman and members of my cabinet, to speak directly to you, to tell you the truth about how the american rescue plan meets the moment. and if it fails at any pa-, i will acknowledge that it failed. but it will not. about how after a long, dark years — one whole year, there is hope and light of better days ahead. if we all do our part, this country will be vaccinated soon, our economy will be on the mend, our kids will be back in school, and we will have proven once again that this country can do anything — hard things, big things, important things. over a year ago, no one could’ve imagined what we were about to go through, but now we’re coming through it, and it’s a shared experience that binds us together as a nation. we are bound together by the loss and the pain of the days that have gone by. but we’re also bound together by the hope and the possibilities of the days in front of us. my fervent prayer for our country is that, after all we have been through, we’ll come together as one people, one nation, one america. i believe we can and we will. we’re seizing this moment. and history, i believe, will record: we faced and overcame one of the toughest and darkest periods in this nation’s history — darkest we’ve ever known. i promise you, we’ll come out stronger with a renewed faith in ourselves, a renewed commitment to one another, to our communities, and to our country. this is the united states of america, and there is nothing — nothing — from the bottom of my heart, i believe this — there is nothing we can’t do when we do it together. so god bless you all. and please, god, give solace to all those people who lost someone. and may god protect our troops. thank you for taking the time to listen. i look forward to seeing you. Transcript
My fellow Americans, 
I want to speak to you tonight about the troubling events of the past week. As I have said, the incursion of the US capitol struck at the very heart of our republic. It angered and appalled millions of Americans across the political spectrum. 
I want to be very clear. I unequivocally condemn the violence that we saw last week. Violence and vandalism have absolutely no place in our country and no place in our movement. Making America Great Again has always been about defending the rule of law, supporting the men and women of law enforcement, and upholding our nation's most sacred traditions and values. 
Mob violence goes against everything I believe in, and everything our movement stands for. No true supporter of mine could ever endorse political violence. No true supporter of mine could ever disrespect law enforcement or our great American flag. No true supporter of mine could ever threaten or harass their fellow Americans. If you do any of these things, you are not supporting our movement. You are attacking it, and you are attacking our country. We cannot tolerate it. 
Tragically, over the course of the past year, made so difficult because of covid-19, we have seen political violence spiral out of control. We have seen too many riots, too many mobs, too many acts of intimidation and destruction. It must stop, whether you are on the right or on the left, a democrat or a republican, there is never a justification for violence. No excuses. No exceptions. 
America is a nation of laws. Those who engaged in the attacks last week will be brought to justice. 
Now I am asking everyone who has ever believed in our agenda, to be thinking of ways to ease tensions, calm tempers, and help to promote peace in our country. There has been reporting that additional demonstrations are being planned in the coming days, both here in Washington and across the country. I have been briefed by the US secret service on the potential threats. 
Every American deserves to have their voice heard in a respectful and peaceful way. That is your First Amendment right. But I cannot emphasize that there must be no violence, no lawbreaking, and no vandalism of any kind. Everyone must follow our laws and obey the instructions of law enforcement. 
I have directed federal agencies to use all necessary resources to maintain order. In Washington, DC, we are bringing in thousands of national guard members to secure the city and ensure that a transition can occur safely and without incident. 
Like all of you, I was shocked and deeply saddened by the calamity at the capitol last week. I want to thank the hundreds of millions of incredible American citizens who have responded to this moment with calm, moderation, and grace. We will get through this challenge, just like we always do. 
I also want to say a few words about the unprecedented assault on free speech we have seen in recent days. These are tense and difficult times. The efforts to censor, cancel, and blacklist our fellow citizens are wrong, and they are dangerous. What is needed now is for us to listen to one another, not to silence to one another. All of us can choose by our actions to rise above the rancor and find common ground and shared purpose. We must focus on advancing the interests of the whole nation, delivering the miracle vaccines, defeating the pandemic, rebuilding the economy, protecting our national security, and upholding the rule of law. 
Today, I am calling on all Americans to overcome the passions of the moment and join together as one American people. Let us choose to move forward united for the good of our families, our communities, and our country. Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.


View Transcriptthank you, thank you, thank you. thank you. (applause.)audience member: four more years! (applause.) the president: (laughs.) well, thank you.my fellow americans, please, if you have a seat, take it. i speak to you tonight from sacred ground in america: independence hall in philadelphia, pennsylvania. this is where america made its declaration of independence to the world more than two centuries ago with an idea, unique among nations, that in america, we’re all created equal. this is where the united states constitution was written and debated. this is where we set in motion the most extraordinary experiment of self-government the world has ever known with three simple words: “we, the people.” “we, the people.” these two documents and the ideas they embody—equality and democracy—are the rock upon which this nation is built. they are how we became the greatest nation on earth. they are why, for more than two centuries, america has been a beacon to the world. but as i stand here tonight, equality and democracy are under assault. we do ourselves no favor to pretend otherwise. so tonight, i have come this place where it all began to speak as plainly as i can to the nation about the threats we face, about the power we have in our own hands to meet these threats, and about the incredible future that lies in front of us if only we choose it. we must never forget: we, the people, are the true heirs of the american experiment that began more than two centuries ago. we, the people, have burning inside each of us the flame of liberty that was lit here at independence hall—a flame that lit our way through abolition, the civil war, suffrage, the great depression, world wars, civil rights. that sacred flame still burns now in our time as we build an america that is more prosperous, free, and just. that is the work of my presidency, a mission i believe in with my whole soul. but first, we must be honest with each other and with ourselves. too much of what’s happening in our country today is not normal. donald trump and the maga republicans represent an extremism that threatens the very foundations of our republic. now, i want to be very clear—very clear up front: not every republican, not even the majority of republicans, are maga republicans. not every republican embraces their extreme ideology. i know because i’ve been able to work with these mainstream republicans. but there is no question that the republican party today is dominated, driven, and intimidated by donald trump and the maga republicans, and that is a threat to this country. these are hard things. but i’m an american president—not the president of red america or blue america, but of all america. and i believe it is my duty—my duty to level with you, to tell the truth no matter how difficult, no matter how painful. and here, in my view, is what is true: maga republicans do not respect the constitution. they do not believe in the rule of law. they do not recognize the will of the people. they refuse to accept the results of a free election. and they’re working right now, as i speak, in state after state to give power to decide elections in america to partisans and cronies, empowering election deniers to undermine democracy itself. maga forces are determined to take this country backwards—backwards to an america where there is no right to choose, no right to privacy, no right to contraception, no right to marry who you love. they promote authoritarian leaders, and they fan the flames of political violence that are a threat to our personal rights, to the pursuit of justice, to the rule of law, to the very soul of this country. they look at the mob that stormed the united states capitol on january 6th—brutally attacking law enforcement—not as insurrectionists who placed a dagger to the throat of our democracy, but they look at them as patriots. and they see their maga failure to stop a peaceful transfer of power after the 2020 election as preparation for the 2022 and 2024 elections. they tried everything last time to nullify the votes of 81 million people. this time, they’re determined to succeed in thwarting the will of the people. that’s why respected conservatives, like federal circuit court judge michael luttig, has called trump and the extreme maga republicans, quote, a “clear and present danger” to our democracy. but while the threat to american democracy is real, i want to say as clearly as we can: we are not powerless in the face of these threats. we are not bystanders in this ongoing attack on democracy. there are far more americans—far more americans from every—from every background and belief who reject the extreme maga ideology than those that accept it. and, folks, it is within our power, it’s in our hands—yours and mine—to stop the assault on american democracy. i believe america is at an inflection point—one of those moments that determine the shape of everything that’s to come after. and now america must choose: to move forward or to move backwards? to build the future or obsess about the past? to be a nation of hope and unity and optimism, or a nation of fear, division, and of darkness? maga republicans have made their choice. they embrace anger. they thrive on chaos. they live not in the light of truth but in the shadow of lies. but together—together, we can choose a different path. we can choose a better path. forward, to the future. a future of possibility. a future to build and dream and hope. and we’re on that path, moving ahead. i know this nation. i know you, the american people. i know your courage. i know your hearts. and i know our history. this is a nation that honors our constitution. we do not reject it. this is a nation that believes in the rule of law. we do not repudiate it. this is a nation that respects free and fair elections. we honor the will of the people. we do not deny it. and this is a nation that rejects violence as a political tool. we do not encourage violence. we are still an america that believes in honesty and decency and respect for others, patriotism, liberty, justice for all, hope, possibilities. we are still, at our core, a democracy. and yet history tells us that blind loyalty to a single leader and a willingness to engage in political violence is fatal to democracy. for a long time, we’ve told ourselves that american democracy is guaranteed, but it’s not. we have to defend it, protect it, stand up for it—each and every one of us. that’s why tonight i’m asking our nation to come together, unite behind the single purpose of defending our democracy regardless of your ideology. we’re all called, by duty and conscience, to confront extremists who will put their own pursuit of power above all else. democrats, independents, mainstream republicans: we must be stronger, more determined, and more committed to saving american democracy than maga republicans are to—to destroying american democracy. we, the people, will not let anyone or anything tear us apart. today, there are dangers around us we cannot allow to prevail. we hear—you’ve heard it—more and more talk about violence as an acceptable political tool in this country. it’s not. it can never be an acceptable tool. so i want to say this plain and simple: there is no place for political violence in america. period. none. ever. we saw law enforcement brutally attacked on january the 6th. we’ve seen election officials, poll workers—many of them volunteers of both parties—subjected to intimidation and death threats. and—can you believe it?—fbi agents just doing their job as directed, facing threats to their own lives from their own fellow citizens. on top of that, there are public figures—today, yesterday, and the day before—predicting and all but calling for mass violence and rioting in the streets. this is inflammatory. it’s dangerous. it’s against the rule of law. and we, the people, must say: this is not who we are. ladies and gentlemen, we can’t be pro-insurrectionist and pro-american. they’re incompatible. we can’t allow violence to be normalized in this country. it’s wrong. we each have to reject political violence with all the moral clarity and conviction this nation can muster. now. we can’t let the integrity of our elections be undermined, for that is a path to chaos. look, i know politics can be fierce and mean and nasty in america. i get it. i believe in the give-and-take of politics, in disagreement and debate and dissent. we’re a big, complicated country. but democracy endures only if we, the people, respect the guardrails of the republic. only if we, the people, accept the results of free and fair elections. only if we, the people, see politics not as total war but mediation of our differences. democracy cannot survive when one side believes there are only two outcomes to an election: either they win or they were cheated. and that’s where maga republicans are today. they don’t understand what every patriotic american knows: you can’t love your country only when you win. it’s fundamental. american democracy only works only if we choose to respect the rule of law and the institutions that were set up in this chamber behind me, only if we respect our legitimate political differences. i will not stand by and watch—i will not—the will of the american people be overturned by wild conspiracy theories and baseless, evidence-free claims of fraud. i will not stand by and watch elections in this country stolen by people who simply refuse to accept that they lost. i will not stand by and watch the most fundamental freedom in this country—the freedom to vote and have your vote counted—and—be taken from you and the american people. look, as your president, i will defend our democracy with every fiber of my being, and i’m asking every american to join me. throughout our history, america has often made the greatest progress coming out of some of our darkest moments, like you’re hearing in that bullhorn. i believe we can and we must do that again, and we are. maga republicans look at america and see carnage and darkness and despair. they spread fear and lies–-lies told for profit and power. but i see a very different america—an america with an unlimited future, an america that is about to take off. i hope you see it as well. just look around. i believed we could lift america from the depths of covid, so we passed the largest economic recovery package since franklin delano roosevelt. and today, america’s economy is faster, stronger than any other advanced nation in the world. we have more to go. i believed we could build a better america, so we passed the biggest infrastructure investment since president dwight d. eisenhower. and we’ve now embarked on a decade of rebuilding the nation’s roads, bridges, highways, ports, water systems, high-speed internet, railroads. i believed we could make america safer, so we passed the most significant gun safety law since president clinton. i believed we could go from being the highest cost of prescriptions in the world to making prescription drugs and healthcare more affordable, so we passed the most significant healthcare reforms since president obama signed the affordable care act. and i believed we could create—we could create a clean energy future and save the planet, so we passed the most important climate initiative ever, ever, ever. the cynics and the critics tell us nothing can get done, but they are wrong. there is not a single thing america cannot do—not a single thing beyond our capacity if we do it together. it’s never easy. but we’re proving that in america, no matter how long the road, progress does come. look, i know the last year—few years have been tough. but today, covid no longer controls our lives. more americans are working than ever. businesses are growing. our schools are open. millions of americans have been lifted out of poverty. millions of veterans once exposed to toxic burn pits will now get what they deserve for their families and the compensation. american manufacturing has come alive across the heartland, and the future will be made in america—no matter what the white supremacists and the extremists say. i made a bet on you, the american people, and that bet is paying off. proving that from darkness —the darkness of charlottesville, of covid, of gun violence, of insurrection—we can see the light. light is now visible. light that will guide us forward not only in words, but in actions—actions for you, for your children, for your grandchildren, for america. even in this moment, with all the challenges we face, i give you my word as a biden: i’ve never been more optimistic about america’s future. not because of me, but because of who you are. we’re going to end cancer as we know it. mark my words. we are going to create millions of new jobs in a clean energy economy. we’re going to think big. we’re going to make the 21st century another american century because the world needs us to. that’s where we need to focus our energy—not in the past, not on divisive culture wars, not on the politics of grievance, but on a future we can build together. the maga republicans believe that for them to succeed, everyone else has to fail. they believe america—not like i believe about america. i believe america is big enough for all of us to succeed, and that is the nation we’re building: a nation where no one is left behind. i ran for president because i believed we were in a battle for the soul of this nation. i still believe that to be true. i believe the soul is the breath, the life, and the essence of who we are. the soul is what makes us “us.” the soul of america is defined by the sacred proposition that all are created equal in the image of god. that all are entitled to be treated with decency, dignity, and respect. that all deserve justice and a shot at lives of prosperity and consequence. and that democracy—democracy must be defended, for democracy makes all these things possible. folks, and it’s up to us. democracy begins and will be preserved in we, the people’s, habits of heart, in our character: optimism that is tested yet endures, courage that digs deep when we need it, empathy that fuels democracy, the willingness to see each other not as enemies but as fellow americans. look, our democracy is imperfect. it always has been. notwithstanding those folks you hear on the other side there. they’re entitled to be outrageous. this is a democracy. but history and common sense—good manners is nothing they’ve ever suffered from. but history and common sense tell us that opportunity, liberty, and justice for all are most likely to come to pass in a democracy. we have never fully realized the aspirations of our founding, but every generation has opened those doors a little wider to include more people who have been excluded before. my fellow americans, america is an idea—the most powerful idea in the history of the world. and it beats in the hearts of the people of this country. it beats in all of our hearts. it unites america. it is the american creed. the idea that america guarantees that everyone be treated with dignity. it gives hate no safe harbor. it installs in everyone the belief that no matter where you start in life, there’s nothing you can’t achieve. that’s who we are. that’s what we stand for. that’s what we believe. and that is precisely what we are doing: opening doors, creating new possibilities, focusing on the future. and we’re only just beginning. our task is to make our nation free and fair, just and strong, noble and whole. and this work is the work of democracy—the work of this generation. it is the work of our time, for all time. we can’t afford to have—leave anyone on the sidelines. we need everyone to do their part. so speak up. speak out. get engaged. vote, vote, vote. and if we all do our duty—if we do our duty in 2022 and beyond, then ages still to come will say we—all of us here—we kept the faith. we preserved democracy. we heeded not our worst instincts but our better angels. and we proved that, for all its imperfections, america is still the beacon to the world, an ideal to be realized, a promise to be kept. there is nothing more important, nothing more sacred, nothing more american. that’s our soul. that’s who we truly are. and that’s who must—we must always be. and i have no doubt—none––that this is who we will be and that we’ll come together as a nation. that we’ll secure our democracy. that for the next 200 years, we’ll have what we had the past 200 years: the greatest nation on the face of the earth. we just need to remember who we are. we are the united states of america. the united states of america. and may god protect our nation. and may god protect all those who stand watch over our democracy. god bless you all. democracy. thank you. Transcript
Good evening, fellow Americans.
I had hoped, when I became President, I would not have to do this again. 
Another massacre. Uvalde, Texas. An elementary school. Beautiful, innocent second, third, fourth graders. And how many scores of little children who witnessed what happened see their friends die as if they’re on a battlefield, for God’s sake. They’ll live with it the rest of their lives.
There’s a lot we don’t know yet, but there’s a lot we do know.
There are parents who will never see their child again, never have them jump in bed and cuddle with them. Parents who will never be the same.
To lose a child is like having a piece of your soul ripped away. There’s a hollowness in your chest, and you feel like you’re being sucked into it and never going to be able to get out. It’s suffocating. And it’s never quite the same.
And it’s a feeling shared by the siblings, and the grandparents, and their family members, and the community that’s left behind.
Scripture says—Jill and I have talked about this in different contexts, in other contexts: “The Lord is near to the brokenhearted and saves the crushed in spirit.” So many crushed spirits.
So, tonight, I ask the nation to pray for them, to give the parents and siblings the strength in the darkness they feel right now.
As a nation, we have to ask: When in God’s name are we going to stand up to the gun lobby? When in God’s name will we do what we all know in our gut needs to be done?
It’s been 340—3,448 days—10 years since I stood up at a high school in Connecticut—a grade school in Connecticut, where another gunman massacred 26 people, including 20 first graders, at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Since then, there have been over 900 incidents of gunfires reported on school grounds.
Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida. Santa Fe High School in Texas. Oxford High School in Michigan. The list goes on and on.
And the list grows when it includes mass shootings at places like movie theaters, houses of worship, and, as we saw just 10 days ago, at a grocery store in Buffalo, New York.
I am sick and tired of it. We have to act. And don’t tell me we can’t have an impact on this carnage.
I spent my career as a senator and as Vice President working to pass commonsense gun laws. We can’t and won’t prevent every tragedy. But we know they work and have a positive impact. When we passed the assault weapons ban, mass shootings went down. When the law expired, mass shootings tripled.
The idea that an 18-year-old kid can walk into a gun store and buy two assault weapons is just wrong.
What in God’s name do you need an assault weapon for except to kill someone?
Deer aren’t running through the forest with Kevlar vests on, for God’s sake. It’s just sick.
And the gun manufacturers have spent two decades aggressively marketing assault weapons which make them the most and largest profit.
For God’s sake, we have to have the courage to stand up to the industry.
Here’s what else I know: Most Americans support commonsense laws—commonsense gun laws.
 
I just got off my trip from Asia, meeting with Asian leaders, and I learned of this while I was on the aircraft. And what struck me on that 17-hour flight—what struck me was these kinds of mass shootings rarely happen anywhere else in the world. 
Why? They have mental health problems. They have domestic disputes in other countries. They have people who are lost. But these kinds of mass shootings never happen with the kind of frequency that they happen in America. Why?
Why are we willing to live with this carnage? Why do we keep letting this happen? Where in God’s name is our backbone to have the courage to deal with it and stand up to the lobbies?   It’s time to turn this pain into action.
For every parent, for every citizen in this country, we have to make it clear to every elected official in this country: It’s time to act.
It’s time—for those who obstruct or delay or block the commonsense gun laws, we need to let you know that we will not forget.
We can do so much more. We have to do more.
Our prayer tonight is for those parents, lying in bed and trying to figure out, “Will I be able to sleep again? What do I say to my other children? What happens tomorrow?”  
May God bless the loss of innocent life on this sad day. And may the Lord be near the brokenhearted and save those crushed in spirit, because they’re going to need a lot of help and a lot of our prayers.
  God love you.


View Transcriptgood evening, my fellow americans. tonight, i’d like to talk to you about where we are as we mark one year since everything stopped because of this pandemic. a year ago, we were hit with a virus that was met with silence and spread unchecked. denials for days, weeks, then months that led to more deaths, more infections, more stress, and more loneliness. photos and videos from 2019 feel like they were taken in another era. the last vacation. the last birthday with friends. the last holiday with the extended family. while it was different for everyone, we all lost something. a collective suffering. a collective sacrifice. a year filled with the loss of life — and the loss of living for all of us. but, in the loss, we saw how much there was to gain in appreciation, respect, and gratitude. finding light in the darkness is a very american thing to do. in fact, it may be the most american thing we do. and that’s what we’ve done. we’ve seen frontline and essential workers risking their lives — sometimes losing them — to save and help others. researchers and scientists racing for a vaccine. and so many of you, as hemingway wrote, being strong in all the broken places. i know it’s been hard. i truly know. as i’ve told you before, i carry a card in my pocket with the number of americans who have died from covid to date. it’s on the back of my schedule. as of now, the total deaths in america: 527,726. that’s more deaths than in world war one, world war two, the vietnam war, and 9/11 combined. they were husbands, wives, sons and daughters, grandparents, friends, neighbors — young and old. they leave behind loved ones unable to truly grieve or to heal, even to have a funeral. but i’m also thinking about everyone else who lost this past year to natural causes, by cruel fate of accident, or other diseases. they, too, died alone. they, too, leave loved ones behind who are hurting badly. you know, you’ve often heard me say before, i talk about the longest walk any parent can make is up a short flight of stairs to his child’s bedroom to say, “i’m sorry. i lost my job. we can’t be here anymore.” like my dad told me when he lost his job in scranton. so many of you have had to make that same walk this past year. you lost your job. you closed your business. facing eviction, homelessness, hunger, a loss of control, and, maybe worst of all, a loss of hope. watching a generation of children who may be set back up to a year or more — because they’ve not been in school — because of their loss of learning. it’s the details of life that matter most, and we’ve missed those details. the big details and small moments. weddings, birthdays, graduations — all the things that needed to happen but didn’t. the first date. the family reunions. the sunday night rituals. it’s all has exacted a terrible cost on the psyche of so many of us. for we are fundamentally a people who want to be with others — to talk, to laugh, to hug, to hold one another. but this virus has kept us apart. grandparents haven’t seen their children or grandchildren. parents haven’t seen their kids. kids haven’t seen their friends. the things we used to do that always filled us with joy have become the things we couldn’t do and broke our hearts. too often, we’ve turned against one another. a mask — the easiest thing to do to save lives — sometimes it divides us. states pitted against one other instead of working with each other. vicious hate crimes against asian americans, who have been attacked, harassed, blamed, and scapegoated. at this very moment, so many of them — our fellow americans — they’re on the frontlines of this pandemic, trying to save lives, and still — still — they are forced to live in fear for their lives just walking down streets in america. it’s wrong, it’s un-american, and it must stop. look, we know what we need to do to beat this virus: tell the truth. follow the scientists and the science. work together. put trust and faith in our government to fulfill its most important function, which is protecting the american people — no function more important. we need to remember the government isn’t some foreign force in a distant capital. no, it’s us. all of us. “we the people.” for you and i, that america thrives when we give our hearts, when we turn our hands to common purpose. and right now, my friends, we are doing just that. and i have to say, as your president, i am grateful to you. last summer, i was in philadelphia, and i met a small-business owner — a woman. i asked her — i said, “what do you need most?” i’ll never forget what she said to me. she said — looking me in the eye, she said, “i just want the truth. the truth. just tell me the truth.” think of that. my fellow americans, you’re owed nothing less than the truth. and for all of you asking when things will get back to normal, here is the truth: the only way to get our lives back, to get our economy back on track is to beat the virus. you’ve been hearing me say that for — while i was running and the last 50 days i’ve been president. but this is one of the most complex operations we’ve under- — ever undertaken as a nation in a long time. that’s why i’m using every power i have as president of the united states to put us on a war footing to get the job done. it sounds like hyperbole, but i mean it: a war footing. and thank god we’re making some real progress now. on my first full day in office, i outlined for you a comprehensive strategy to beat this pandemic. and we have spent every day since attempting to carry it out. two months ago, the country — this country didn’t have nearly enough vaccine supply to vaccinate all or near all of the american public. but soon we will. we’ve been working with the vaccine manufacturers — pfizer, moderna, johnson & johnson — to manufacture and purchase hundreds of millions of doses of these three safe, effective vaccines. and now, at the direction and with the assistance of my administration, johnson & johnson is working together with a competitor, merck, to speed up and increase the capacity to manufacture new johnson & johnson vaccine, which is one shot. in fact, just yesterday, i announced — and i met with the ceos of both companies — i announced our plan to buy an additional 100 million doses of johnson & johnson vaccines. these two companies — competitors — have come together for the good of the nation, and they should be applauded for it. it’s truly a national effort, just like we saw during world war ii. now because of all the work we’ve done, we’ll have enough vaccine supply for all adults in america by the end of may. that’s months ahead of schedule. and we’re mobilizing thousands of vaccinators to put the vaccine in one’s arm. calling on active duty military, fema, retired doctors and nurses, administrators, and those to administer the shots. and we’ve been creating more places to get the shots. we’ve made it possible for you to get a vaccine at nearly one — any one of nearly 10,000 pharmacies across the country, just like you get your flu shot. we’re also working with governors and mayors, in red states and blue states, to set up and support nearly 600 federally supported vaccination centers that administer hundreds of thousands of shots per day. you can drive up to a stadium or a large parking lot, get your shot, never leave your car, and drive home in less than an hour. we’ve been sending vaccines to hundreds of community health centers all across america, located in underserved areas. and we’ve been deploying and we will deploy more mobile vehicles and pop-up clinics to meet you where you live so those who are least able to get the vaccine are able to get it. we continue to work on making at-home testing available. and we’ve been focused on serving people in the hardest-hit communities of this pandemic — black, latino, native american, and rural communities. so, what does all this add up to? when i took office 50 days ago, only 8 percent of americans after months — only 8 percent of those over the age of 65 had gotten their first vaccination. today, that number is [nearly] 65 percent. just 14 percent of americans over the age 75, 50 days ago, had gotten their first shot. today, that number is well over 70 percent. with new guidance from the centers for disease control and prevention — the cdc — that came out on monday, it means simply this: millions and millions of grandparents who went months without being able to hug their grandkids can now do so. and the more people who are fully vaccinated, the cd [cdc] will continue to provide guidance on what you can do in the workplace, places of worship, with friends, and as well as travel. when i came into office, you may recall, i set a goal that many of you said was, kind of, way over the top. i said i intended to get 100 million shots in people’s arms in my first 100 days in office. tonight, i can say we are not only going to meet that goal, we’re going to beat that goal. because we’re actually on track to reach this goal of 100 million shots in arms on my 60th day in office. no other country in the world has done this. none. now i want to talk about the next steps we’re thinking about. first, tonight, i’m announcing that i will direct all states, tribes, and territories to make all adults — people 18 and over — eligible to be vaccinated no later than may 1. let me say that again: all adult americans will be eligible to get a vaccine no later than may 1. that’s much earlier than expected. let me be clear: that doesn’t mean everyone’s going to have that shot immediately, but it means you’ll be able to get in line beginning may 1. every adult will be eligible to get their shot. to do this, we’re going to go from a million shots a day that i promised in december, before i was sworn in, to maintaining — beating our current pace of two million shots a day, outpacing the rest of the world. secondly, at the time when every adult is eligible in may, we will launch, with our partners, new tools to make it easier for you to find the vaccine and where to get the shot, including a new website that will help you first find the place to get vaccinated and the one nearest you. no more searching day and night for an appointment for you and your loved ones. thirdly, with the passage of the american rescue plan — and i thank again the house and senate for passing it — and my announcement last month of a plan to vaccinate teachers and school staff, including bus drivers, we can accelerate the massive, nationwide effort to reopen our schools safely and meet my goal, that i stated at the same time about 100 million shots, of opening the majority of k-8 schools in my first 100 days in office. this is going to be the number one priority of my new secretary of education, miguel cardona. fourth, in the coming weeks, we will issue further guidance on what you can and cannot do once fully vaccinated, to lessen the confusion, to keep people safe, and encourage more people to get vaccinated. and finally, fifth, and maybe most importantly: i promise i will do everything in my power, i will not relent until we beat this virus, but i need you, the american people. i need you. i need every american to do their part. and that’s not hyperbole. i need you. i need you to get vaccinated when it’s your turn and when you can find an opportunity, and to help your family and friends and neighbors get vaccinated as well. because here’s the point: if we do all this, if we do our part, if we do this together, by july the 4th, there’s a good chance you, your families, and friends will be able to get together in your backyard or in your neighborhood and have a cookout and a barbeque and celebrate independence day. that doesn’t mean large events with lots of people together, but it does mean small groups will be able to get together. after this long hard year, that will make this independence day something truly special, where we not only mark our independence as a nation, but we begin to mark our independence from this virus. but to get there, we can’t let our guard down. this fight is far from order — from over. as i told the woman in pennsylvania, “i will tell you the truth.” a july 4th with your loved ones is the goal. but a goal — a lot can happen; conditions can change. the scientists have made clear that things may get worse again as new variants of the virus spread. and we’ve got work to do to ensure everyone has confidence in the safety and effectiveness of all three vaccines. so my message to you is this: listen to dr. fauci, one of the most distinguished and trusted voices in the world. he has assured us the vaccines are safe. they underwent rigorous scientific review. i know they’re safe. vice president harris and i know they’re safe. that’s why we got the vaccine publicly in front of cameras so — for the world to see, so you could see us do it. the first lady and the second gentleman also got vaccinated. talk to your family, your friends, your neighbors — the people you know best who’ve gotten the vaccine. we need everyone to get vaccinated. we need everyone to keep washing their hands, stay socially distanced, and keep wearing the masks as recommended by the cdc. because even if we devote every resource we have, beating this virus and getting back to normal depends on national unity. and national unity isn’t just how politics and politicians vote in washington or what the loudest voices say on cable or online. unity is what we do together as fellow americans. because if we don’t stay vigilant and the conditions change, then we may have to reinstate restrictions to get back on track. and, please, we don’t want to do again. we’ve made so much progress. this is not the time to let up. just as we are emerging from a dark winter into a hopeful spring and summer is not the time to not stick with the rules. i’ll close with this. we’ve lost so much over the last year. we’ve lost family and friends. we’ve lost businesses and dreams we spent years building. we’ve lost time — time with each other. and our children have lost so much time with their friends, time with their schools. no graduation ceremonies this — this spring. no graduations from college, high school, moving-up ceremonies. you know, and there’s something else we lost. we lost faith in whether our government and our democracy can deliver on really hard things for the american people. but as i stand here tonight, we’re proving once again something i have said time and time again until they’re probably tired of hearing me say it. i say it foreign leaders and domestic alike: it’s never, ever a good bet to bet against the american people. america is coming back. the development, manufacture, and distribution of the vaccines in record time is a true miracle of science. it is one of the most extraordinary achievements any country has ever accomplished. and we also just saw the perseverance rover land on mars. stunning images of our dreams that are now a reality. another example of the extraordinary american ingenuity, commitment, and belief in science and one another. and today, i signed into law the american rescue plan, an historic piece of legislation that delivers immediate relief to millions of people. it includes $1,400 in direct rescue checks — payments. that means a typical family of four earning about $110,000 will get checks for $5,600 deposited if they have direct deposit or in a check — a treasury check. it extends unemployment benefits. it helps small businesses. it lowers healthcare premiums for many. it provides food and nutrition, keeps families in their homes. and it will cut child poverty in this country in half, according to the experts. and it fi- — and it funds all the steps i’ve just described to beat the virus and create millions of jobs. in the coming weeks and months, i’ll be traveling, along with the first lady, the vice president, the second gentleman and members of my cabinet, to speak directly to you, to tell you the truth about how the american rescue plan meets the moment. and if it fails at any pa-, i will acknowledge that it failed. but it will not. about how after a long, dark years — one whole year, there is hope and light of better days ahead. if we all do our part, this country will be vaccinated soon, our economy will be on the mend, our kids will be back in school, and we will have proven once again that this country can do anything — hard things, big things, important things. over a year ago, no one could’ve imagined what we were about to go through, but now we’re coming through it, and it’s a shared experience that binds us together as a nation. we are bound together by the loss and the pain of the days that have gone by. but we’re also bound together by the hope and the possibilities of the days in front of us. my fervent prayer for our country is that, after all we have been through, we’ll come together as one people, one nation, one america. i believe we can and we will. we’re seizing this moment. and history, i believe, will record: we faced and overcame one of the toughest and darkest periods in this nation’s history — darkest we’ve ever known. i promise you, we’ll come out stronger with a renewed faith in ourselves, a renewed commitment to one another, to our communities, and to our country. this is the united states of america, and there is nothing — nothing — from the bottom of my heart, i believe this — there is nothing we can’t do when we do it together. so god bless you all. and please, god, give solace to all those people who lost someone. and may god protect our troops. thank you for taking the time to listen. i look forward to seeing you. Transcript
My fellow Americans, 
I want to speak to you tonight about the troubling events of the past week. As I have said, the incursion of the US capitol struck at the very heart of our republic. It angered and appalled millions of Americans across the political spectrum. 
I want to be very clear. I unequivocally condemn the violence that we saw last week. Violence and vandalism have absolutely no place in our country and no place in our movement. Making America Great Again has always been about defending the rule of law, supporting the men and women of law enforcement, and upholding our nation's most sacred traditions and values. 
Mob violence goes against everything I believe in, and everything our movement stands for. No true supporter of mine could ever endorse political violence. No true supporter of mine could ever disrespect law enforcement or our great American flag. No true supporter of mine could ever threaten or harass their fellow Americans. If you do any of these things, you are not supporting our movement. You are attacking it, and you are attacking our country. We cannot tolerate it. 
Tragically, over the course of the past year, made so difficult because of covid-19, we have seen political violence spiral out of control. We have seen too many riots, too many mobs, too many acts of intimidation and destruction. It must stop, whether you are on the right or on the left, a democrat or a republican, there is never a justification for violence. No excuses. No exceptions. 
America is a nation of laws. Those who engaged in the attacks last week will be brought to justice. 
Now I am asking everyone who has ever believed in our agenda, to be thinking of ways to ease tensions, calm tempers, and help to promote peace in our country. There has been reporting that additional demonstrations are being planned in the coming days, both here in Washington and across the country. I have been briefed by the US secret service on the potential threats. 
Every American deserves to have their voice heard in a respectful and peaceful way. That is your First Amendment right. But I cannot emphasize that there must be no violence, no lawbreaking, and no vandalism of any kind. Everyone must follow our laws and obey the instructions of law enforcement. 
I have directed federal agencies to use all necessary resources to maintain order. In Washington, DC, we are bringing in thousands of national guard members to secure the city and ensure that a transition can occur safely and without incident. 
Like all of you, I was shocked and deeply saddened by the calamity at the capitol last week. I want to thank the hundreds of millions of incredible American citizens who have responded to this moment with calm, moderation, and grace. We will get through this challenge, just like we always do. 
I also want to say a few words about the unprecedented assault on free speech we have seen in recent days. These are tense and difficult times. The efforts to censor, cancel, and blacklist our fellow citizens are wrong, and they are dangerous. What is needed now is for us to listen to one another, not to silence to one another. All of us can choose by our actions to rise above the rancor and find common ground and shared purpose. We must focus on advancing the interests of the whole nation, delivering the miracle vaccines, defeating the pandemic, rebuilding the economy, protecting our national security, and upholding the rule of law. 
Today, I am calling on all Americans to overcome the passions of the moment and join together as one American people. Let us choose to move forward united for the good of our families, our communities, and our country. Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.


View Transcriptthank you, thank you, thank you. thank you. (applause.)audience member: four more years! (applause.) the president: (laughs.) well, thank you.my fellow americans, please, if you have a seat, take it. i speak to you tonight from sacred ground in america: independence hall in philadelphia, pennsylvania. this is where america made its declaration of independence to the world more than two centuries ago with an idea, unique among nations, that in america, we’re all created equal. this is where the united states constitution was written and debated. this is where we set in motion the most extraordinary experiment of self-government the world has ever known with three simple words: “we, the people.” “we, the people.” these two documents and the ideas they embody—equality and democracy—are the rock upon which this nation is built. they are how we became the greatest nation on earth. they are why, for more than two centuries, america has been a beacon to the world. but as i stand here tonight, equality and democracy are under assault. we do ourselves no favor to pretend otherwise. so tonight, i have come this place where it all began to speak as plainly as i can to the nation about the threats we face, about the power we have in our own hands to meet these threats, and about the incredible future that lies in front of us if only we choose it. we must never forget: we, the people, are the true heirs of the american experiment that began more than two centuries ago. we, the people, have burning inside each of us the flame of liberty that was lit here at independence hall—a flame that lit our way through abolition, the civil war, suffrage, the great depression, world wars, civil rights. that sacred flame still burns now in our time as we build an america that is more prosperous, free, and just. that is the work of my presidency, a mission i believe in with my whole soul. but first, we must be honest with each other and with ourselves. too much of what’s happening in our country today is not normal. donald trump and the maga republicans represent an extremism that threatens the very foundations of our republic. now, i want to be very clear—very clear up front: not every republican, not even the majority of republicans, are maga republicans. not every republican embraces their extreme ideology. i know because i’ve been able to work with these mainstream republicans. but there is no question that the republican party today is dominated, driven, and intimidated by donald trump and the maga republicans, and that is a threat to this country. these are hard things. but i’m an american president—not the president of red america or blue america, but of all america. and i believe it is my duty—my duty to level with you, to tell the truth no matter how difficult, no matter how painful. and here, in my view, is what is true: maga republicans do not respect the constitution. they do not believe in the rule of law. they do not recognize the will of the people. they refuse to accept the results of a free election. and they’re working right now, as i speak, in state after state to give power to decide elections in america to partisans and cronies, empowering election deniers to undermine democracy itself. maga forces are determined to take this country backwards—backwards to an america where there is no right to choose, no right to privacy, no right to contraception, no right to marry who you love. they promote authoritarian leaders, and they fan the flames of political violence that are a threat to our personal rights, to the pursuit of justice, to the rule of law, to the very soul of this country. they look at the mob that stormed the united states capitol on january 6th—brutally attacking law enforcement—not as insurrectionists who placed a dagger to the throat of our democracy, but they look at them as patriots. and they see their maga failure to stop a peaceful transfer of power after the 2020 election as preparation for the 2022 and 2024 elections. they tried everything last time to nullify the votes of 81 million people. this time, they’re determined to succeed in thwarting the will of the people. that’s why respected conservatives, like federal circuit court judge michael luttig, has called trump and the extreme maga republicans, quote, a “clear and present danger” to our democracy. but while the threat to american democracy is real, i want to say as clearly as we can: we are not powerless in the face of these threats. we are not bystanders in this ongoing attack on democracy. there are far more americans—far more americans from every—from every background and belief who reject the extreme maga ideology than those that accept it. and, folks, it is within our power, it’s in our hands—yours and mine—to stop the assault on american democracy. i believe america is at an inflection point—one of those moments that determine the shape of everything that’s to come after. and now america must choose: to move forward or to move backwards? to build the future or obsess about the past? to be a nation of hope and unity and optimism, or a nation of fear, division, and of darkness? maga republicans have made their choice. they embrace anger. they thrive on chaos. they live not in the light of truth but in the shadow of lies. but together—together, we can choose a different path. we can choose a better path. forward, to the future. a future of possibility. a future to build and dream and hope. and we’re on that path, moving ahead. i know this nation. i know you, the american people. i know your courage. i know your hearts. and i know our history. this is a nation that honors our constitution. we do not reject it. this is a nation that believes in the rule of law. we do not repudiate it. this is a nation that respects free and fair elections. we honor the will of the people. we do not deny it. and this is a nation that rejects violence as a political tool. we do not encourage violence. we are still an america that believes in honesty and decency and respect for others, patriotism, liberty, justice for all, hope, possibilities. we are still, at our core, a democracy. and yet history tells us that blind loyalty to a single leader and a willingness to engage in political violence is fatal to democracy. for a long time, we’ve told ourselves that american democracy is guaranteed, but it’s not. we have to defend it, protect it, stand up for it—each and every one of us. that’s why tonight i’m asking our nation to come together, unite behind the single purpose of defending our democracy regardless of your ideology. we’re all called, by duty and conscience, to confront extremists who will put their own pursuit of power above all else. democrats, independents, mainstream republicans: we must be stronger, more determined, and more committed to saving american democracy than maga republicans are to—to destroying american democracy. we, the people, will not let anyone or anything tear us apart. today, there are dangers around us we cannot allow to prevail. we hear—you’ve heard it—more and more talk about violence as an acceptable political tool in this country. it’s not. it can never be an acceptable tool. so i want to say this plain and simple: there is no place for political violence in america. period. none. ever. we saw law enforcement brutally attacked on january the 6th. we’ve seen election officials, poll workers—many of them volunteers of both parties—subjected to intimidation and death threats. and—can you believe it?—fbi agents just doing their job as directed, facing threats to their own lives from their own fellow citizens. on top of that, there are public figures—today, yesterday, and the day before—predicting and all but calling for mass violence and rioting in the streets. this is inflammatory. it’s dangerous. it’s against the rule of law. and we, the people, must say: this is not who we are. ladies and gentlemen, we can’t be pro-insurrectionist and pro-american. they’re incompatible. we can’t allow violence to be normalized in this country. it’s wrong. we each have to reject political violence with all the moral clarity and conviction this nation can muster. now. we can’t let the integrity of our elections be undermined, for that is a path to chaos. look, i know politics can be fierce and mean and nasty in america. i get it. i believe in the give-and-take of politics, in disagreement and debate and dissent. we’re a big, complicated country. but democracy endures only if we, the people, respect the guardrails of the republic. only if we, the people, accept the results of free and fair elections. only if we, the people, see politics not as total war but mediation of our differences. democracy cannot survive when one side believes there are only two outcomes to an election: either they win or they were cheated. and that’s where maga republicans are today. they don’t understand what every patriotic american knows: you can’t love your country only when you win. it’s fundamental. american democracy only works only if we choose to respect the rule of law and the institutions that were set up in this chamber behind me, only if we respect our legitimate political differences. i will not stand by and watch—i will not—the will of the american people be overturned by wild conspiracy theories and baseless, evidence-free claims of fraud. i will not stand by and watch elections in this country stolen by people who simply refuse to accept that they lost. i will not stand by and watch the most fundamental freedom in this country—the freedom to vote and have your vote counted—and—be taken from you and the american people. look, as your president, i will defend our democracy with every fiber of my being, and i’m asking every american to join me. throughout our history, america has often made the greatest progress coming out of some of our darkest moments, like you’re hearing in that bullhorn. i believe we can and we must do that again, and we are. maga republicans look at america and see carnage and darkness and despair. they spread fear and lies–-lies told for profit and power. but i see a very different america—an america with an unlimited future, an america that is about to take off. i hope you see it as well. just look around. i believed we could lift america from the depths of covid, so we passed the largest economic recovery package since franklin delano roosevelt. and today, america’s economy is faster, stronger than any other advanced nation in the world. we have more to go. i believed we could build a better america, so we passed the biggest infrastructure investment since president dwight d. eisenhower. and we’ve now embarked on a decade of rebuilding the nation’s roads, bridges, highways, ports, water systems, high-speed internet, railroads. i believed we could make america safer, so we passed the most significant gun safety law since president clinton. i believed we could go from being the highest cost of prescriptions in the world to making prescription drugs and healthcare more affordable, so we passed the most significant healthcare reforms since president obama signed the affordable care act. and i believed we could create—we could create a clean energy future and save the planet, so we passed the most important climate initiative ever, ever, ever. the cynics and the critics tell us nothing can get done, but they are wrong. there is not a single thing america cannot do—not a single thing beyond our capacity if we do it together. it’s never easy. but we’re proving that in america, no matter how long the road, progress does come. look, i know the last year—few years have been tough. but today, covid no longer controls our lives. more americans are working than ever. businesses are growing. our schools are open. millions of americans have been lifted out of poverty. millions of veterans once exposed to toxic burn pits will now get what they deserve for their families and the compensation. american manufacturing has come alive across the heartland, and the future will be made in america—no matter what the white supremacists and the extremists say. i made a bet on you, the american people, and that bet is paying off. proving that from darkness —the darkness of charlottesville, of covid, of gun violence, of insurrection—we can see the light. light is now visible. light that will guide us forward not only in words, but in actions—actions for you, for your children, for your grandchildren, for america. even in this moment, with all the challenges we face, i give you my word as a biden: i’ve never been more optimistic about america’s future. not because of me, but because of who you are. we’re going to end cancer as we know it. mark my words. we are going to create millions of new jobs in a clean energy economy. we’re going to think big. we’re going to make the 21st century another american century because the world needs us to. that’s where we need to focus our energy—not in the past, not on divisive culture wars, not on the politics of grievance, but on a future we can build together. the maga republicans believe that for them to succeed, everyone else has to fail. they believe america—not like i believe about america. i believe america is big enough for all of us to succeed, and that is the nation we’re building: a nation where no one is left behind. i ran for president because i believed we were in a battle for the soul of this nation. i still believe that to be true. i believe the soul is the breath, the life, and the essence of who we are. the soul is what makes us “us.” the soul of america is defined by the sacred proposition that all are created equal in the image of god. that all are entitled to be treated with decency, dignity, and respect. that all deserve justice and a shot at lives of prosperity and consequence. and that democracy—democracy must be defended, for democracy makes all these things possible. folks, and it’s up to us. democracy begins and will be preserved in we, the people’s, habits of heart, in our character: optimism that is tested yet endures, courage that digs deep when we need it, empathy that fuels democracy, the willingness to see each other not as enemies but as fellow americans. look, our democracy is imperfect. it always has been. notwithstanding those folks you hear on the other side there. they’re entitled to be outrageous. this is a democracy. but history and common sense—good manners is nothing they’ve ever suffered from. but history and common sense tell us that opportunity, liberty, and justice for all are most likely to come to pass in a democracy. we have never fully realized the aspirations of our founding, but every generation has opened those doors a little wider to include more people who have been excluded before. my fellow americans, america is an idea—the most powerful idea in the history of the world. and it beats in the hearts of the people of this country. it beats in all of our hearts. it unites america. it is the american creed. the idea that america guarantees that everyone be treated with dignity. it gives hate no safe harbor. it installs in everyone the belief that no matter where you start in life, there’s nothing you can’t achieve. that’s who we are. that’s what we stand for. that’s what we believe. and that is precisely what we are doing: opening doors, creating new possibilities, focusing on the future. and we’re only just beginning. our task is to make our nation free and fair, just and strong, noble and whole. and this work is the work of democracy—the work of this generation. it is the work of our time, for all time. we can’t afford to have—leave anyone on the sidelines. we need everyone to do their part. so speak up. speak out. get engaged. vote, vote, vote. and if we all do our duty—if we do our duty in 2022 and beyond, then ages still to come will say we—all of us here—we kept the faith. we preserved democracy. we heeded not our worst instincts but our better angels. and we proved that, for all its imperfections, america is still the beacon to the world, an ideal to be realized, a promise to be kept. there is nothing more important, nothing more sacred, nothing more american. that’s our soul. that’s who we truly are. and that’s who must—we must always be. and i have no doubt—none––that this is who we will be and that we’ll come together as a nation. that we’ll secure our democracy. that for the next 200 years, we’ll have what we had the past 200 years: the greatest nation on the face of the earth. we just need to remember who we are. we are the united states of america. the united states of america. and may god protect our nation. and may god protect all those who stand watch over our democracy. god bless you all. democracy. thank you. Transcript
Good evening, fellow Americans.
I had hoped, when I became President, I would not have to do this again. 
Another massacre. Uvalde, Texas. An elementary school. Beautiful, innocent second, third, fourth graders. And how many scores of little children who witnessed what happened see their friends die as if they’re on a battlefield, for God’s sake. They’ll live with it the rest of their lives.
There’s a lot we don’t know yet, but there’s a lot we do know.
There are parents who will never see their child again, never have them jump in bed and cuddle with them. Parents who will never be the same.
To lose a child is like having a piece of your soul ripped away. There’s a hollowness in your chest, and you feel like you’re being sucked into it and never going to be able to get out. It’s suffocating. And it’s never quite the same.
And it’s a feeling shared by the siblings, and the grandparents, and their family members, and the community that’s left behind.
Scripture says—Jill and I have talked about this in different contexts, in other contexts: “The Lord is near to the brokenhearted and saves the crushed in spirit.” So many crushed spirits.
So, tonight, I ask the nation to pray for them, to give the parents and siblings the strength in the darkness they feel right now.
As a nation, we have to ask: When in God’s name are we going to stand up to the gun lobby? When in God’s name will we do what we all know in our gut needs to be done?
It’s been 340—3,448 days—10 years since I stood up at a high school in Connecticut—a grade school in Connecticut, where another gunman massacred 26 people, including 20 first graders, at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Since then, there have been over 900 incidents of gunfires reported on school grounds.
Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida. Santa Fe High School in Texas. Oxford High School in Michigan. The list goes on and on.
And the list grows when it includes mass shootings at places like movie theaters, houses of worship, and, as we saw just 10 days ago, at a grocery store in Buffalo, New York.
I am sick and tired of it. We have to act. And don’t tell me we can’t have an impact on this carnage.
I spent my career as a senator and as Vice President working to pass commonsense gun laws. We can’t and won’t prevent every tragedy. But we know they work and have a positive impact. When we passed the assault weapons ban, mass shootings went down. When the law expired, mass shootings tripled.
The idea that an 18-year-old kid can walk into a gun store and buy two assault weapons is just wrong.
What in God’s name do you need an assault weapon for except to kill someone?
Deer aren’t running through the forest with Kevlar vests on, for God’s sake. It’s just sick.
And the gun manufacturers have spent two decades aggressively marketing assault weapons which make them the most and largest profit.
For God’s sake, we have to have the courage to stand up to the industry.
Here’s what else I know: Most Americans support commonsense laws—commonsense gun laws.
 
I just got off my trip from Asia, meeting with Asian leaders, and I learned of this while I was on the aircraft. And what struck me on that 17-hour flight—what struck me was these kinds of mass shootings rarely happen anywhere else in the world. 
Why? They have mental health problems. They have domestic disputes in other countries. They have people who are lost. But these kinds of mass shootings never happen with the kind of frequency that they happen in America. Why?
Why are we willing to live with this carnage? Why do we keep letting this happen? Where in God’s name is our backbone to have the courage to deal with it and stand up to the lobbies?   It’s time to turn this pain into action.
For every parent, for every citizen in this country, we have to make it clear to every elected official in this country: It’s time to act.
It’s time—for those who obstruct or delay or block the commonsense gun laws, we need to let you know that we will not forget.
We can do so much more. We have to do more.
Our prayer tonight is for those parents, lying in bed and trying to figure out, “Will I be able to sleep again? What do I say to my other children? What happens tomorrow?”  
May God bless the loss of innocent life on this sad day. And may the Lord be near the brokenhearted and save those crushed in spirit, because they’re going to need a lot of help and a lot of our prayers.
  God love you.


View Transcript